Knowledge to guide your career preparation

From Pexels

As the popularity and hype of Artificial Intelligence rises, so does the number of people who want to work as data scientists. This is leading many universities to offer new degrees in data science and online platforms to add more MOOCs related to the subject. Not long ago, I was a student trying to find my way into the data science world. After making my transition into a career as a data scientist, I look back and realize I did some things right, and there were other things I didn’t understand at all. Of those things, there are 3 that stand out to me the most.

1. Technical Skills Are the Easy Part

In college, I spent a lot of time wondering what classes would best prepare me for a career in data science. Looking back now, I am fairly surprised at which classes I actually think were the most valuable. Most of them weren’t the classes that taught me python or linear regression. I’ve learned that technical skills seem fairly easy to come by with a little time spent learning and practicing. The classes that benefited me the most were those that pushed me to learn and think on my own, despite the subject matter.

Once you leave school, there are no more classes to teach you the skills you might need to do a job. Learning how to learn at this point becomes invaluable. If you can pick up a recent research paper about a new technique, understand it, and learn how to implement something from it, you are ready for anything. On top of that, the natural drive to learn things yourself is attractive to potential employers.

I would also argue that technical skills are much more plentiful in the workforce than those with good problem solving skills. If you have any chance to practice these types of critical thinking skills before you enter the workforce, whether through a class or personal projects, it will most likely benefit you more than knowing how one more model works.

2. Being a Data Scientist is a Lot Data and a Little Science

You should also know what you are getting into before diving into data science. The daily work of a data scientist is not that…