Don’t let your System 1 judge this post.

Here are 5 books that will strengthen your decision-making skills. They will hopefully make your two systems of cognitive processes better, enhancing both your intuitive and deliberate thinking. Below you will find my reasons of why you should reach each one of them together with a quote to nudge you to do so. My best recommendation is to read them slowly while applying what you learn into your everyday life.

PREDICTABLY IRRATIONAL | DAN ARIELY

Read it to become more aware of how irrational, we, humans are. The book is full of field experiments to demonstrate interesting facts such as why are you always buying that 3x2 socks offer while waiting in line at a fashion store.

“Giving up on our long-term goals for immediate gratification, my friend, is procrastination”

NAKED STATISTICS | CHARLES WHEELAN

Read it to learn basic concepts of statistics, from probability, inference, correlation, and regression with funny, sometimes provocative real-life examples that are easy to follow. I keep on entertaining my friends with the Monty Hall problem.

“Statistics is like a high-caliber weapon: helpful when used correctly and potentially disastrous in the wrong hands.”

NUDGE | RICHARD H. THALER & CASS R. SUNSTEIN

Read it to simply become a better version of yourself. The concept of this book revolves around improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. I apply many of the examples to my daily life such as placing fruit in a visible and accesible place to nudge my behavior and decisions to eat healthier.

“You want to nudge people into socially desirable behavior, do not, by any means, let them know that their current actions are better than the social norm”

THE PARADOX OF CHOICE | BARRY SCHWARTZ

Read it to get a better understanding of how choices impact your life. Researcher and author Barry Schwartz promotes a simple theory arguing that too many choices limit one’s freedom. After reading this, I’m trying to become more of a satisficer — a person who is pleased to settle for a good enough option — rather than a maximizer — a person who examine each and every alternative available before making a decision.

“Unfortunately, the proliferation of choice in our lives robs us of the opportunity to decide for ourselves just how important any given decision is.”

ALGORITHMS TO LIVE BY | BRIAN CRISTIAN & TOM GRIFFITHS

Read it to better solve common and everyday decision-making situations applying concepts of computer science, such as when you should stop looking for a parking spot or whether you should keep on going to your favorite restaurants or explore new ones.

“To try and fail is at least to learn; to fail to try is to suffer the inestimable loss of what might have been”

Happy learning! If you’d like to get in touch, here’s my LinkedIn.