Artificial intelligence is a much more important technology than you know. Every business needs to apply it in their website design, app development, and marketing process. To put it in other words, every business needs to work with AI developers. For example, developers of game apps and gaming consoles are very vast in artificial intelligence. In fact, many of them are AI developers. This is because artificial intelligence makes video games interesting. Whatever video game you play, you’ll get a response from the system and it will be tailored by your input with no human intervention.

This article actually discusses the benefits that make both AI developers and AI technology very important. After going through it, you’ll have an idea of what you’re missing if you’re yet to exploit the technology.

1. Voice-based search is on the rise

Voice command started with Alexa and many people latched on to the convenience of issuing voice commands instead of having to type them. It takes artificial intelligence for any system to be able to process voice commands.

Now, a lot of people have already started carrying out online searches with voice commands. Don’t you also prefer to issue voice command instead of typing it out? In fact, it has been reported that half of the online searches will be voice-based by the end of 2020. It is definitely because of the convenience. So, it is necessary to hire AI developers to optimize your website for voice-based searches.

2. 24/7 availability

Websites and mobile apps are available 24/7 but support staff usually aren’t available 24/7. Any customer care team that is available 24 hours a day must be running shifts. Unfortunately, customers are now too impatient and they want instant response. They no longer want to wait for 24 hours.

Artificial intelligence provides the solution to the problem — AI chatbots. Many websites are manned by chatbots that will always respond instantly to customers’ queries anytime every time. You must have observed that live chats are available on so many websites now. Most of them are run by chatbots. Using chatbots will save you the money you’ll pay for hiring people to man your website 24 hours a day. So, AI saves costs and increases your rate of sales conversion.

3. Improved user experience

When implemented properly, visitors on your website can enjoy great user experience and that will make them come back for more. One way to achieve that is to predict what they’re searching for. When they’re typing the name of any product, your website should present them with the options of the products whose names match those letters so they will just have to choose.

Reducing the number of typing visitors do on your website helps to improve their experience tremendously. Another way to achieve this is to present them with their last order. Based on their ordering patterns, bots can present them with their last order so they don’t have to repeat the process all over again. Imagine someone who orders more than 10 items at the same time. It will be a lot of relief if she is presented with her exact order so she won’t have to select the items one after the other again.

Now let’s talk about the advantages of AI in other areas.

4. Reduced errors

AI robots work on codes and lack emotions. So, they cannot be distracted by anything. They perform their tasks with 99.9% accuracy that humans cannot possibly match. Whether it is data analysis or simple computations, robots will carry it out with reliable accuracy.

This is why some companies employ them for data analysis. You understand that important business decisions are based on data analysis figures and it can be catastrophic if the figures are not accurate. For the sake of accuracy, employ AI for your business reports and data analyses.

5. Increased speed

This is self-explanatory on its own. Robots, machines, and computers work with astonishing speed. So speed is one of the reasons to exploit artificial intelligence technology. Take Microsoft Excel for instance. To sum up hundreds of figures, you only need to highlight the figures and click on the auto-sum button and the answer appears in a flash. That is exactly how the robots work with speed. So, if you appreciate the speed of computations, think of artificial intelligence.

6. Dangerous tasks

Some tasks cannot be carried out by humans because of the danger involved. However, these tasks need to be carried out because of the importance of their results. Such tasks are now carried out by robots. For example, some explorations are dangerous because of the gases that may be given off by the act. It is better to design robots to carry out such tasks.

These days, robots are designed to explore space, take snapshots and send them over to earth. Some robots can even fly a space shuttle on their own. They were designed specifically for the job. It is all based on artificial intelligence.

7. The proliferation of medical apps

The artificial intelligence has yielded the emergence of numerous medical apps. These apps help with mild diagnoses and prescriptions. They only need to input the symptoms and their medical history on the apps. The ailment will be diagnosed and drugs will be prescribed.

These apps rely on large volumes of medical data to be able to diagnose and prescribed drugs accurately.

To sum it up, artificial intelligence helps with voice commands, 24/7 availability, improved user experience, reduced error, increased speed, dangerous tasks, medical diagnoses and prescriptions, and in many other areas.

Author Bio:

Melissa Crooks is Content Writer who writes for Hyperlink InfoSystem, a mobile app development company in New York, USA and India that holds the best team of skilled and expert app developers. She is a versatile tech writer and loves exploring the latest technology trends, entrepreneur and startup column. She also writes for top app development companies.