In the current fervent pursuit of generalized AI, we risk sleepwalking into self-obsolescence. By downplaying the risks of AI by believing that the benefits will outweigh the burdens, if and when a generalized AI is achieved and comes online, it will be too late.

A critical approach to the problem of AI can differ in content from cliché pessimism. Our great fear does not have to be a violent Terminator or Matrix scenario resulting in a tragic life-imitating-art plot twist. Although that is within the realm of possibility, rather than assuming a stance that looks outward, towards the machine, contemplating its power, it behooves us to critique the fetishistic pursuit of AI by turning inward, and asking questions. For example, what does AI (and our pursuit thereof) tell us about ourselves? Where does the dream of AI come from? What is the context of its appeal?

Self-entanglement. | Photo by Artem Kim on Unsplash

Capitalist Modernity

The pursuit of AI comes out of our contemporary history — a late capitalist period of advanced production. From machinery and technology comes the possibility to imagine a utopian world in which production is fully automated, leaving humans with free time — so the dream goes. The realities of production, distribution, and consumption in our time create the real, concrete basis for the extension of our imagination in this way.

Dreams of full automation aside, the period of capitalist modernity engenders forms of social life specific to itself. Quotidian realities are taken for granted — e.g., ideas about individual freedom/entrepreneurship and Darwinesque competition in the marketplace. These truths appear to have universal, transhistorical validity, but are in fact aspects of social life specific to the capitalist epoch. They are slices of the general human experience of creation and refinenment that are necessary for this system’s maintenance and reproduction.

One of the distinguishing features of capitalist modernity is alienation. When people go to work, they necessarily suspend their otherwise individual freedoms to the hierarchical and authoritarian structure of the workplace. People are separated from the product of their labor, be it clothing manufacturing or a line of code. Our labor belongs to another. It is the property of another, which is a basic feature of life most of us take for granted. Recently, Taylor Swift was quite publicly alienated from her labor when music executive Scooter Braun purchased her entire back catalog, despite, as writer Noah Berlatsky notes, being the author of her own lyrics and music and a powerhouse in her own right. According to Berlatsky, what differentiates Swift from everyone else is

[M]ost people not only don’t own their labor but aren’t in a cultural position to even imagine owning it. Swift can say, “I should own my albums,” and it makes instant sense. But if an assembly line worker said, “I should own my cars,” or a Walmart employee said, “I should own my store” they’d receive substantially less public support, presuming they could even find anyone to listen.

These separations — of rights and products of work — are forms of alienated activity in the modern world. Let it be said, however, that people today suffer from far less overt domination than those in previous societies (we are not at the mercy of feudal landlords, although many of us can be evicted by our urban ones). Yet, as the late Marx scholar Moishe Postone argued, “To consider freedom only with reference to questions of personal dependence and independence can serve to veil the existence of a more overarching form of unfreedom…” (2015, p. 8). We are nonetheless compelled as individuals to do what we must in order to survive. It is this form of abstract alienation, characterized by the heteronomous history of modernity, that differentiates capitalism from previous social formations.

Alienation in the twenty-first century plays a disruptive and destructive social role. It is simultaneously concrete and abstract, determined by immediate social activity and experienced as a kind of shadowy, ineffable form of social domination. One of its ramifications is the collective nonresponse surrounding the development of artificial intelligence — perhaps because we imagine a being of our own creation, separate from us, as more complete than the kind of people we have allowed ourselves to become.

In short, alienation is about relations that separate and remove human beings from aspects of their nature. It is human nature to work and to create, yet we are separated from it. It is in our nature to produce, but we are separated from our products, unable to control what we create and what to do with our creations. We become separated from each other, forced into competition and forms of hostility, much of the time between classes (see Office Space for a fictional example, and the fight for a living wage and safe work conditions happening every day). Through such separations and cut-offs, the vast majority of human beings in modernity are reduced to their lowest common denominator, having lost the particular qualities that rendered them human to begin with. By way of thoroughgoing alienated forms of life, humans become “abstractions,” individualized, isolated, and emptied of connection to any kind of social whole beyond superficial commonalities. According to NYU professor of politics Bertell Ollman, alienation is “this process which largely accounts for the power that money has in capitalist societies, the buying of objects which could have never been sold had they remained integral parts of their producer” (1976, p. 135).

Given the configuration of our current world, it is no surprise that people have begun to question the status quo. The freedom we know today is one-sided and shallow. One is free to go hungry if one “chooses” not to work — the choice itself a false one. Rather, we are forced into underpaid labor and told we are free. In such a context it is understandable that there would exist a collective yearning for completely intelligent and capable machinery, an instrument to set us free. We want to endow a synthetic being with powers to point beyond its own limitations and rid us of our drudgery, while we systematically deny ourselves that same power under current conditions. AI as we know it is tantamount to outsourcing humanity because we have alienated ourselves.