Originally published at https://rsomani95.github.io.Visit the link for a better formatted, interactive version of the post with many more images.

GitHub: https://github.com/rsomani95/shot-type-classifier

Table of Contents

-What is Visual Language, and Why Does it Matter?

-Neural Networks 101 (Read if you don’t know what neural networks are)

-The Dataset

— — Data Sources

— — Shot Types

-Methodology

-Results

— — Training Performance

— — Confusion Matrix

— — Heatmaps (Highlight of the post)

— — Robustness

-Conclusion

Analysing cinema is a time-consuming process. In the cinematography domain alone, there’s a lot of factors to consider, such as shot scale, shot composition, camera movement, color, lighting, etc. Whatever you shoot is in some way influenced by what you’ve watched. There’s only so much one can watch, and even lesser that one can analyse thoroughly.

This is where neural networks offer ample promise. They can recognise patterns in images that weren’t possible until less than a decade ago, thus offering an unimaginable speed up in analysing cinema. I’ve developed a neural network that focuses on one fundamental element of visual grammar: shot types. It’s capable of recognising 6 unique shot types, and is~91% accurate. The pretrained model, validation dataset (the set of images used to determine its accuracy), code used to train the network, and some more code to classify your own images is freely available here.

W hat is Visual Language, and Why Does it Matter?

When you’re writing something — an email, an essay, a report, a paper, etc, you’re using the rules of grammar to put forth your point. Your choice of words, the way you construct the sentence, correct use of punctuation, and most importantly, what you have to say, all contribute towards the effectiveness of your message.

Cinema is about how ideas and emotions are expressed through a visual form. It’s a visual language, and just like any written language, your choice of words (what you put in the shot/frame), the way you construct the sentence (the sequence of shots), correct use of punctuation (editing & continuity) and what you have to say (the story) are key factors of creating effective cinema. The comparison doesn’t apply rigidly, but is a good starting point to start thinking about cinema as a language.

The most basic element of this language is a shot. There’s many factors to consider while filming a shot — how big should the subject be, should the camera be placed above or below the subject, how long should the shot be, should the camera remain still or move with the subject, and if it’s moving, how should it move? Should it follow the subject, observe it from a certain point while turning right/left or up/down and should the movement be smooth or jerky. There are other major visual factors, such as color and lighting, but we’ll restrict our scope to these factors only. A filmmaker chooses how to construct a shot based on what he/she wants to convey, and then juxtaposes them effectively to drive home the message.

Let’s consider this scene from Interstellar. To give you some context, a crew of two researchers and a pilot land on a mysterious planet to collect crucial data from the debris of a previous mission. This planet is very different from Earth — it is covered in an endless ocean, and its gravity is 130% stronger than Earth’s.

This scene consists of 89 shots, and the average length of each shot is 2.66 seconds.

For almost all the shots showing Cooper (Matthew McConaughey) inside the spacecraft, Nolan uses a Medium Close Up, showing Cooper from the chest up. This allows us to see his facial expressions clearly, as well as a bit of the spacecraft he’s in and his upper body movements. Notice how the camera isn’t 100% stable. The camera moves slightly according to Cooper’s movements, making us feel more involved in this scene.