A Data Analysis of the Third Democratic Debate

Photo by Kyle Head on Unsplash

In many ways, politics seems to have replaced baseball as the national pastime. Just as sports blogs and ESPN argue about ballgames, so do news sites and pundits on CNN obsess over the minutiae of political campaigns.

In the spirit of politics as sporting event, I thought it would be fun to steal one more trick from that field— sports statistics. Nate Silver and others have perfected the art of poll punditry, but I hope to take it a step further. Just as Sabermetrics gave new insights into the world of baseball, I hope that political data might give us a better view of the political landscape. To that end, I parsed the transcript of the last Democratic debate and analyzed the data to look for trends. Here’s what I found.

Attention Doesn’t Always Follow Polling

In terms of data, the one piece of information that the news does cover is the speaking time. In theory, the more popular candidates should get more time since viewers are more interested in what they have to say. In practice this isn’t exactly the case.

Below are two plots for comparison. On the left is a graph of the latest Morning Consult Poll. On the right is the number of words spoken by each candidate during the September debate.

Left — Democratic Polling : Right — Words Spoke during Sept Debate

As expected, frontrunner Joe Biden got the largest number of words in during the debate. However below him, there are large divergences between polling and speaking time. Sen. Cory Booker who only polls at 3% spoke almost as much as the former Vice President. Granted, most of this was towards the end of the debate. Still, it illustrates how establishment candidates are given favorable treatment on television.

Interestingly, Bernie Sanders, who got a good amount of time was near the bottom of the list in terms of words spoken. It’s clear that he speaks more slowly and uses fewer words than his opponents. I also observed that he was less willing to exceed his allotted time and didn’t need to be cut off as much as the other candidates.