Have you ever wondered how your computer/network is able to avoid being infected with malware and bad traffic inputs from the internet? The reason why it can detect it so well is because there are systems in place to protect your valuable information held in your computer or networks. These systems that detect malicious traffic inputs are called Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and are trained on internet traffic record data. The most common data set is the NSL-KDD, and is the benchmark for modern-day internet traffic.

The NSL-KDD data set is not the first of its kind. The KDD cup was an International Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Tools Competition. In 1999, this competition was held with the goal of collecting traffic records. The competition task was to build a network intrusion detector, a predictive model capable of distinguishing between “bad’’ connections, called intrusions or attacks, and “good’’ normal connections. As a result of this competition, a mass amount of internet traffic records were collected and bundled into a data set called the KDD’99, and from this, the NSL-KDD data set was brought into existence, as a revised, cleaned-up version of the KDD’99 from the University of New Brunswick.

This data set is comprised of four sub data sets: KDDTest+, KDDTest-21, KDDTrain+, KDDTrain+_20Percent, although KDDTest-21 and KDDTrain+_20Percent are subsets of the KDDTrain+ and KDDTest+. From now on, KDDTrain+ will be referred to as train and KDDTest+ will be referred to as test. The KDDTest-21 is a subset of test, without the most difficult traffic records (Score of 21), and the KDDTrain+_20Percent is a subset of train, whose record count makes up 20% of the entire train dataset. That being said, the traffic records that exist in the KDDTest-21 and KDDTrain+_20Percent are already in test and train respectively and aren’t new records held out of either dataset.

These data sets contain the records of the internet traffic seen by a simple intrusion detection network and are the ghosts of the traffic encountered by a real IDS and just the traces of its existence remains. The data set contains 43 features per record, with 41 of the features referring to the traffic input itself and the last two are labels (whether it is a normal or attack) and Score (the severity of the traffic input itself).