Member-only story A gentle introduction to Recommendation Systems

Introduction to Recommendation Systems

If you are here, reading about Recommendation Systems, surely you already know what we’ll be talking about, so maybe you can just jump over this brief chapter. But if you came here attracted by the cover image, or if you want to know more about how Recommendation Systems emerged and grew up in the last years, then stay tunned with this section of the article.

Let’s go back in time and try to picture this: it’s Friday night and you want to rent a videotape in your closest Blockbuster. You head over there with your girlfriend, already talking about which movie are you going to rent. Maybe a comedy? Or perhaps an action movie? A thunderstorm is coming, what settles the perfect mood for a horror movie or a thriller.

While you’re thinking, your girlfriend tells you: ‘did you search for any good recommendation on the Internet?’. Unfortunately, the Internet was down all day at your job, and anyway, you’re still trying to get yourself around with all that mumbo jumbo around the World Wide Web.

You finally arrive there, but after almost an hour of deliberations, you still don’t know what to chose. You already saw all the popular movies, and the premier section of the store is full of crap. You don’t want to be nitpicking, but there’s just nothing good. Your girlfriend asks the Blockbuster mate behind the desk, but he seems to know less about movies than your grandpa, and he is really not down with the kids. It’s already getting late and you’re knackered, so long story short, you decide to rent a good old movie you already saw. Is better to keep it sound and safe, than winging about your Friday’s night plan.

This example may seem old, but in so many aspects of life, people keep making decisions in a similar way. I can assure you that my grandpa doesn’t use Google when he wants to buy a book for himself. However, and luckily for the youngsters, the decision making today in…