Mountains. Always mountains in every post. Image credit

Member-only story A Guide to Sentiment, Positioning Analysis, and Trend Analysis of the US Stock Market.

An introduction to my Market Monitor for analyzing and making actionable trade decisions in the most complicated and liquid market in the world. Blake Urban · Follow Published in Speculate Freedom · 34 min read · Aug 8, 2019 -- 1 Share

Intro

When I started as a trader, I started as a small cap trader. I followed the theories of Jesse Stine and Pradeep Bonde. Stine called his setup, the “SuperStock” setup and Pradeep Bonde(Stockbee) called his an Episodic Pivot. I still trade these, but I have added a bunch of my own wrinkles. They are no longer my primary thing anymore. I now trade the indexes primarily, via Futures. My consistency and profitability have skyrocketed. I did well as a small cap trader, but as my account grew I became more and more nervous about having capital tied up in low liquidity names overnight. There is so much gap risk in small caps. Holding through earnings is a scary thing as well.

A lot of people that trade individual stocks, take a bottom-up approach. I can see the idea behind this, but I personally found that in practice that approach does not work as well as a top-down approach. I know some of this comes down to personal preference, but for me having a strong understanding of how the market is behaving is incredibly powerful for both individual stock traders and index traders.

The data I am going to present in this document is data from my daily market monitor. This is the information I track on a daily basis. I have another market monitor, which is much larger in scope, where I track longer-term data. I track a lot of Macro data in that one. I typically update that one once a month.

At some point, I may explain the longer-term market monitor as well. But that will be an even longer blog post. With both of these market monitors, I have devised a point system that attributes a final score based on the readings on all of these metrics. I assign weights to the various metrics. The most useful metrics get a bigger weight score. I then add all the scores together and get a total score. This is all done automatically in spreadsheets. I am not sharing those spreadsheets at this time, I might include them in the book when/if I ever finish the book.