The year is 1954. Two Americans, inventor George Devol and entrepreneur Joseph F. Engelberger are discussing their favorite science fiction writers at a cocktail party. Devol has recently filed his latest idea at the Patent Office, the first Universal Automation or Unimate, an early effort to replace factory workers with robotic machinery. His creative genius had already given birth to two of the first technological marvels of the modern world: the Phantom Doorman, an automatic door with photocells and vacuum tubes, and the Speedy Weeny, a machine that uses microwave energy to cook hot dogs on demand.

Engelberger found the Unimate industrial transfer machine so compelling that seven years later, as soon as the patent was approved, he formed a company to develop the ideas of Mr. Devol. The name of that company was Unimation Inc. Their “programmed article transfer”, later rebaptized “manipulator” and finally “robot” (one can only wonder whether Devol and Engelberger had discussed Isaac Asimov’s first use of the term “robotics” over those cocktails) eventually entered full-scale production as a unit for materials handling and welding.

Unimate makes its public debut in London. “Unimate. A machine that can reach up to seven feet and perform a multitude of tasks in the factory or laboratory, as skillfully as a man but without getting tired. It’s controlled by a built-in memory system which you lead just once through the required measurements and it can then repeat it 24 hours a day, week after week”.

Unimate reshaped and sped up production lines at manufacturing plants around the world. General Motors, Chrysler, Ford and Fiat quickly recognized the benefits and placed large orders, helping turn the machine into one of the “Top 50 inventions of the past 50 years”. This was but the seed that spawned a new industry: commercial robotics. In time, Unimation Inc. and its sole rival, Cincinnati Milacron Inc. of Ohio, would see the rise of several Japanese and European competitors that incorporated new innovations such as electric micro-processors, servo gun technology and arc welding.

However, the world would have to wait a little longer to see the first truly collaborative robot (or cobot), which was installed at Linatex in 2008. Unlike its predecessors, Universal Robot’s UR5 is lightweight, inexpensive, easy to set up and can be re-programmed by untrained operators.

The cobot UR5. Image courtesy of Universal Robots.

“You don’t need to type or calculate anything to get the robot to work. You just need to show it the movements”. Universal Robots.

Cobots are designed to share a workspace with humans — which is why the UR5 doesn’t need to be placed behind a fence and can safely function alongside employees. This is in stark contrast to traditional industrial robots, usually locked in cages because their rapid movements and heavy bulk can make them unsafe for humans. Once installed, the heavy robotic arms commonly seen in factories are rarely moved; the majority are actually bolted to the floor. This newer generation is, instead, lighter, plug & play and aided by sensor and vision technology to help make workspaces easier to share.

Despite the fact that cobots were introduced eleven years ago, less than 5 percent of all industrial robots sold in 2018 were collaborative (according to the Financial Times). Cobots might not be new, but they still have the potential to revolutionize production, particularly for smaller companies — which account for an impressive 70 percent of global manufacturing. It’s estimated that the cobot market will grow from just over $100m in 2018 to $3bn by 2020, because these flexible robots are considerably cheaper than their traditional industrial counterparts (averaging a price of $24,000 each, according to Barclays Capital).

Sawyer™, a high-performance collaborative robot from Rethink Robotics

It is expected that the adoption of cobots will significantly increase within industrial environments over the coming years. But what is the case for their use in other areas, such as healthcare?

At the Copenhagen University Hospital in Gentofte, the cobot UR5 is already being used to optimize the handling and sorting of blood samples, helping the laboratory uphold its target of delivering more than 90% of results within 1 hour. Universal Robots’ mechanical arm has also been incorporated into the Modus V™, developed by Synaptive Medical in Canada to assist in neurosurgery by providing unprecedented views of patient anatomy and perform less invasive procedures with more precision. And that’s not all of it. Cobots are also beginning to be utilized in other medical areas, for example for telepresence, rehabilitation, medical transportation and sanitation.

Some of these scenarios come with a new set of challenges, as they are filled with dynamic and unpredictable interactions that are significantly different from those within an industrial environment.

For example, a robot nurse might be asked to support a patient fetch specific medicine from a cabinet. The robot would need to understand what the patient is requesting in whatever way they express it, locate the cabinet, navigate through the room avoiding obstacles, open the cabinet, grasp the right medicine and give it to the patient. In order to handle an object, a robot needs to select the correct grasp for a certain shape, understand how different materials respond to force and coordinate feedback and joint steps when handing them over to a person. During these types of interactions, humans naturally monitor the pace and workload of their partners and adapt their handovers accordingly. Robots would need to achieve similar adaptivity in performing them.

Manipulating objects involves a series of actions that are deeply entwined with perception, control, and coordination.