A Simple but Effective Interview Prep Trick

Just in time for the holidays, my gift to you, fellow job seeker, is a very practical method for preparing for an interview. If you do it too, you are guaranteed 1 million job offers! But seriously, after doing this, it will be much easier to talk about yourself and your work during the interview. And the easier it is to recall information about your skills, the easier the interview will be.

The method? Annotate the #$% out of your resume.

Make a copy of your resume, and save it as a separate file. Then, spend one to three hours making comments on that document about each skill, project, or role as it relates to The Role You’re Interviewing For (“TRYIF” for short). The interviewer likely uses your resume as a guide to the questions they will ask you, whether it’s cultural or technical, and so you can focus on both in your comments.

This is especially helpful if you have one “generic” resume that you’ve been applying to jobs with for the past few weeks. It’s an exercise to jog your memory about each topic and think of it through the lens of TRYIF. The more recently you’ve thought about these things, the easier it will be to talk about them.

Google docs is a good way to organize your resume thoughts

Your comments should cover at least one of these things, and the more you cover the better your preparation will be. Each is followed by an example from my actual resume annotation prep I did earlier today:

a) Definitions or explanations of the item in your own words or from other sources, again whatever benefits you most. Seaborn: “Python data visualization library that provides a high-level interface for drawing attractive and informative statistical graphics.” (from its website) or Seaborn: Makes matplotlib prettier.

b) Objective pros and cons of the item. Pandas: easy to use because of the tables, but can’t handle large amounts of data (more than ~10gb it gets real slow)

c) Significant uses of the item in your past projects Flask: Deployed Convergence and the Doppel app using it

d) Your opinion of the item Overdose Project: Was hard to find a dataset for this one, learned a lot about the Census and its API and thresholds.

Some of these might seem “extra”, but there are a few good reasons to annotate your resume. Often the interviewer is interested in hearing how you explain things to people that don’t know exactly what you’re talking about. There’s also the chance that the interviewer isn’t familiar with one of the things on your resume, and then you can quickly recall the easy explanation you just created for them. Finally, these are easy to write because no one will see them but you. You don’t have to worry about grammar or making them perfect — it’s for your brain alone!

Interviewing is not easy, but combine this method with the general interview suggestion to do lots of projects, and you’re on your way to a job offer, my friend. Try it out yourself, and drop me a line what you think!

Happy new year! Hopefully happy new job too!