Actuarial Science and Data Science with Lifelib Mackenzie Mitchell · Follow 5 min read · Jul 29, 2019 -- Share

The field of the actuarial sciences puts emphasis on the subjects of mathematics, probability and statistics, economics, finance, and risk management. There is a subject area, however, that is not given enough attention and is becoming more integrated into the profession of actuarial work. This subject, or rather tool, has the potential to automate much of the repetitive calculations and analyses that actuaries work through daily. This tool possesses the potential to change the actuarial field such that these highly skilled and intelligent professionals would be able to expend their time and energy on solving new problems, rather than repetitively making calculations that could be programmed into a computer.

What is Actuarial Science?

A quick Google search to retrieve a definition of Actuarial Science returns the definition below.

From the perspective of someone who has completed the curriculum to earn a B.S. in Actuarial Science, I believe that the subject matter can be simplified to be described as data science that is specifically applied to the risk management, insurance, and finance industries.

Actuaries must take and pass a series of exams that cover financial mathematics, probability and statistics, time series and forecasting, insurance, and risk management, among a plethora of other subjects which are woven into the material. There are different levels of distinction for actuaries, and depending on the individual’s goals, someone wishing to pursue an actuarial designation will be expected to pass anywhere from 7 to 10 exams. Each exam has a duration of at least three hours, and it is expected that actuarial students study at least 100 hours for each hour of the exam. This is the students’ chance to show how they have mastered the subject being tested, the tests may be taken any number of times before being passed and are often retaken as they are not always passed on the first try.

Discounting bond coupons to determine the price of a bond- Automation with programming. BA-II Plus vs. Python