In this article I will introduce recent developments in this field.

Artificial Intelligence has been seeking a lot of attention as it tries to replicate human intelligence for analyzing complex data around us. The two major subsets of AI: machine learning and deep learning has created a lot of excitement in the research community for its viable exploitation in different fields. In this article, we will look at the recently introduced state of the art in the field of Bioinformatics.

Bioinformatics is a field of analysis of biological data. Basic application in this field involves analysis of biological sequence and molecular structure where as advance application includes modelling of biological systems.

AI in bioinformatics includes both basic as well as clinical research with the help of biological sequence matching, protein-protein interaction and function-structure analysis. This analysis helps in the design and discovery of drugs as well as complex systems.

So in this article, we will look at the recent trends in the field of AI in bioinformatics:

Protein remote homology detection based on bi-directional long short term memory, 2018(Link to the original paper: here) Evaluating Protein Transfer learning with TAPE, 2019 (here) Generative Modeling for Protein Structure, 2019(here) Protein Remote Homology Detection Using Dissimilarity-Based Multiple Instance Learning, 2018 (here) Protein Remote Homology Detection Based on Profiles, 2019 (here)

What are proteins?

Proteins are linear chain of amino acids. It is encoded in the standard 25-character alphabet, with 20 characters for standard amino acids, 2 for non-standard, 2 for ambiguous and 1 for unknown. Throughout the discussion, any protein x of length L is a sequence of 20 discrete amino acid character (x₁,x₂……,x₂o) Example- ‘MEEPQSD……..DSD’ is a protein sequence from Kinase family.

Can NLP-based techniques be adapted to extract useful biological information???

Protein remote homology detection based on bi-directional long short term memory:

The phrase ‘protein remote homology detection’ means the classification of protein sequence into their respective superfamily by extracting essential information from the long protein sequence(mainly by analyzing structural ore sequence similarity).

The problem statement breaks down to the task of sequence classfication into their respective groups(superfamily)

So, basically in the proposed work, the researchers have introduced ProDec-BLSTM, a network architecture which consists of different layers: an input layer, a bidirectional LSTM layer, time distributed dense layer and output layer. This architecture tries to capture information from every hidden value of bidirectional LSTM and further process on it. A summary regarding this can be found here.

Architecture for ProDec-BLSTM

Evaluating Protein Transfer learning with TAPE:

Transfer Learning came up in the field of computer vision and is now being used in various other fields such as Natural language Processing(NLP). It refers to the idea of using the knowledge gained from one task to solve a related task. For example,

It tries to capture various information including learning a variety of linguistic features such as structure, syntax, grammar in the form of long term and short term dependencies from a large corpus. Then it uses this knowledge for initialization and training of other models working on similar kind of NLP tasks such as sentiment analysis or text summarization.

Protein data is sequence data so researchers in the bioinformatics community have made attempts to extract information from protein sequence data with the advanced techniques in NLP. To facilitate this progress, Task Assessing Protein Embeddings(TAPE) which comprises of 5 biological semi-supervised learning task that is spread across the domains of protein biology has been introduced. So it majorly focuses on three areas of protein biology such as structure prediction, detection of remote homology and protein engineering. The 5 biologically relevant tasks which serve as a benchmark are: Secondary Structure Prediction, Contact Prediction, Remote Homology Detection, Fluorescence Landscape Prediction, and Stability Landscape Prediction. The performance has been benchmarked against three major representative models recurrent, convolutional and attention-based. Apart from these two different models have also been used.

Generative Modeling for Protein Structures:

The generative models aim to learn the true representation of the data distribution such that the generated data distribution looks similar to the original. However, comparing and learning true data distribution is not possible. So we try to learn a model whose data representation is similar to the true data. One of the efficient approaches is Generative Adversarial Networks(GANS) which uses a generator and discriminator network to achieve this. These are basically two neural networks where the generator tries to generate the natural image and the discriminator tries to determine whether the generated image is fake or real. This can be analogous to the scenario where it can be thought of as minimax game where the generator tries to fool the discriminator by generating an image close to the original image and the discriminator tries not to get fooled by improving its discriminative abilities. This model aims at achieving equilibrium between the two networks.

Architecture for GANs

In this paper, GANs are used to generate protein structure and predict the missing sections of corrupted protein structure. The data involves the usage of 3D protein structure which is encoded as the 2D pairwise distance between alpha-carbon. This representation does not retain the sequence information however this information is sufficient enough for structure recovery. These distance matrices are called ‘maps’.

The architecture of the proposed method in the paper

Generating and designing DNA with deep generative models, is another paper which demonstrates how GANs can be used to generate new sequences whose properties are expected to be better than the ones in the protein training data set.(here)

Protein Remote Homology Detection Using Dissimilarity-Based Multiple Instance Learning:

The task of remote homology detection involves the identification of functional or structure related similarity in the protein sequence data. Sometimes the homologous protein sequence(the ones belonging to the same superfamily) show very less sequence similarity. The entire task depends on how the feature vector representation for proteins has been constructed.

One of the most widely used methods for this feature construction of sequence data is the N-gram(k-mers)- which are a short subsequence of consecutive symbols. So the vectorial representation consists of the number of times the dictionary N-grams(amino sequence) has appeared in a given protein sequence. This method has forced N to remain small because a larger value of N would lead to longer and sparse representation.

For example, if the value of N is 2; the dictionary N-grams(20 amino sequence) would consist of 20ⁿ subsequence in feature vector. So, 20²= 400 such feature representations. Hence a single protein sequence will be represented by 1x20². As the value of N will increase the size of feature vector will also increase.

So, this paper has proposed a novel vectorial representation based on Multiple Instance Learning(MIL) which has shown good results for SVM based discriminative techniques.

In the case of MIL problem, the objects are represented by a bag which consists of a set of feature vectors. Then a label is assigned to the whole bag and not individual feature vectors. It makes an assumption that the bag is considered to be positive if any trace of(at least) a positive instance is present inside the bag.

So here, the protein sequence is thought to be a bag of fragments of size N. This technique provides 2 benefits:

The label for a particular bag is determined by a small set of relevant instances. The homology between two proteins is directly proportional to the presence of a small set of informative fragments. It does not require the size of N-mers to be small, as there is no constraint on the size of subsequence.

Protein Remote Homology Detection Based on Profile:

This task of classification revolves around the construction of a more informative feature vector representation for the protein sequence data. In this paper, the authors have tried to improve upon the profile-based method which uses Position Specific Frequency Matrix(PSFM) for feature extraction. This state-of-the-art has proposed techniques to remove noise from the profile(feature set extracted from PSFM) by removing amino acids of low frequency which is called as Top frequency profile(TFP). Now further to this converted profile Autocross covariance(ACC) is applied to make the length of protein vector same.

PSFM is a matrix containing the frequency of each of the standard amino acid ‘i’ occurring in column ‘j’ which represents the sequence of a given protein of length L

So in simple terms data in this domain can be treated as sequence data carrying some contextual information relevant to biological life.

Conclusion

In this post, I have made an attempt to attract the attention of readers on how Machine Learning and Deep Learning can be extended to the fields of Bioinformatics. I hope I was able to relate how the biological sequence data is similar to sequence data used in Natural Language Processing and hence similar techniques can be applied in this field too. The main aim was to make the readers aware of the ongoing research in this field.

In the next post, I want to further explore the working and details of (https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08230)