In recent times we have been seeing an influx of AI based art created from real life datasets like photographs and paintings. In such works, a machine learns and gets inspired from human works of art and creates something similar. But the true essence of creativity lies in not just repeating or simulating part or whole of an inspiration, but also being able to create surprises, new connections and something unique (non repeatable). This is why it is arguably said that machines cannot replace human creativity. An original artwork maybe inspired, but the human adds a unique value which makes it original.

Last month, a friend and I worked on an idea of an AI artist living in the clouds, creating poetry and art from everyday life. We named her Auria. She was able to create art inspired from the world. But there was a certain uniqueness or a surprise missing in her work. The fact that generated-art can be repeated has always been a void for me to fill (my bets are on the field of emergence). That got me thinking- if an AI artist can get inspired from the human world, can a human artist get inspiration from AI?

Let me explain by first telling you how inspiration works for me.

I have been practicing meditation for some time and digging into the root of a thought – how does a thought arise? Although I am not successful enough to be an enlightened master, I have had certain insights. For one, a thought comes as a feeling (for a lack of a better word). Now this feeling is very raw and interpretable. Based on our experiences, we will have an immediate insight from this “thought predecessor” or we could further interpret it to get different meanings. For eg. Imagine you had the “feeling” of an oblong white humming sound. (Yes shapes, colors and sounds together). You could immediately associate it to an aeroplane’s wings if you just had taken a flight, or on further interpretation you could associate it with a walkway in the factory you are working at. These “thought predecessors” are usually images, sounds, touch sensations or any other sensory sensations. How we interpret and which sensation we give priority to, is what turns out to become a thought. The thought then becomes action and so on and so forth. Largely, when we dream, we see a series of these thought predecessors and we interpret and associate in our own ways. Since the interpretations are based on our experiences, we feel that dreams are relatable. In fact interpretation (or wrapping your head around) is largely how we go about life and learning, generally.

Coming back to our initial thought, what is an Augmented Artist? An Augmented Artist is one who gets his inspiration from Artificial Intelligence. Rather, AI augments the human artist.

Let’s put all that debate over “Will AI replace human creativity?” at rest and think about how AI could augment human creativity.

I did an experiment to try such Augmented artistry :

Becoming an Augmented Artist

Auria produces art from a generated poem and paints it based on her “mood”. Some of her works are below: