An Overview of Orthogonal Partial Least Squares

Have you ever heard of Orthogonal Partial Least-Squares (OPLS)? This article aims to give you a clear and concise overview of OPLS and its advantages in the development of more efficient predictive models. Christian L. Goueguel, PhD · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 6 min read · Dec 20, 2019 -- 1 Share

What is OPLS?

First and foremost, let me briefly recall that Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression is, without doubt, one of the most, or maybe the most, multivariate regression methods commonly used in chemometrics. In fact, PLS was originally developed around 1975 by Herman Wold for use in the field of econometrics and was later embraced in the 1980’s by prominent chemometricians such as Svante Wold — Herman Wold’s son, who in 1971 coined the term chemometrics to describe this emerging field of using advanced statistical and machine learning methods in analytical chemistry applications — , Harald Martens, Bruce Kowalski, Tormod Naes, and Paul Geladi, just to name a few. Over the past few decades, PLS — whether as a regression or classification method — has become very popular among chemometrics practitioners for dealing with multicollinearity in applications such as multivariate calibration and process analytical technology, where there are usually fewer observations (samples) than variables (wavelengths).

In 2002, Johan Trygg and Svante Wold introduced a variant of PLS in a paper entitled “Orthogonal projections to latent structures (O‐PLS)”. The new approach is a supervised multivariate data projection method used to relate a set of predictor variables (X) to one or more responses (Y). Basically, like PLS, O-PLS attempts to extract the maximum information reflecting the variation in the data set, while assuming the existence of a small subset of hidden variables in the X-data to predict the response variables. These subsets are formally called latent variables (or LVs) because they are unmeasurable. Historically, this concept of hidden structure in a data set is a century old and comes from methods such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The O-PLS method, as named by the authors, uses orthogonal signal correction previously developed by S. Wold — Chemometrics Intell. Lab. Syst., 1998, 44, 175 — to maximize the explained covariance on the…