APTOS 2019 Blindness Detection

Image credits http://medi-whale.com

Diabetic retinopathy is a diabetes complication that affects eyes. Damage to the blood vessels of the light-sensitive tissue of the retina causes this complication. Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a leading cause of vision-loss globally. Approximately one-third of 285 million people with diabetes mellitus worldwide have signs of DR.

Imagine being able to detect DR before it causes problems. Early detection of DR could save millions of diabetics from losing their vision, which is the goal of a problem featured in Kaggle by Asia Pacific Tele-Ophthalmology Society (APTOS).

Learn more about the competition here.

I was intrigued by the idea of detecting blindness in at-risk patients and that was my motivation for trying to use AI to solve this problem. APTOS provided a large set of fundus photography retina images that were taken under a wide variety of imaging conditions. The data was diverse and expansive.

A clinician rated each image for the severity of diabetic retinopathy on a scale from 0 to 4 where the numbers represent the extent of the complication as follows:

This is an image classification problem.

Image classification deals with understanding the images and their context with respect to the categories. In order to group a set of data into different classes or categories, the relationship between the data and the classes into which they are classified is understood by the machine learning algorithms.

As Deep Learning gains popularity due to its supremacy in terms of accuracy over different prediction methods, I decided to use a deep learning solution to classify these images. Here are two graphs depicting the difference between traditional machine learning and deep learning.

In traditional Machine learning techniques, domain expertise is necessary because most of the different features and categories must be labelled. Only after you have successfully identified the relevant features machine learning algorithms can recognize patterns and give accurate outputs.

Deep Learning algorithms have a big advantage over traditional machine learning algorithms because they learn high-level features from data in an incremental manner, removing the need for domain expertise and hard-core feature extraction. Especially for complex problems such as image classification, natural language processing, and speech recognition require deep learning algorithms in order to be accurate and precise.