Are Deep Learning models always the best?

Photo by Alina Grubnyak on Unsplash

Deep learning (DL) has been taking over almost all application domains of AI/ML in industry as well as in research communities. Stepping out of the academic world 2 years ago and working in a Data Science (DS) role, I have had a chance to witness the emergence and prevail of DL in both domains. While there is no doubt that DL has been outperforming “traditional” ML methods in many applications/studies, there are more and more academic scientists and ML practitioners calling for a recognition of the fact that DL models and mindsets might be (and keep being) used in an abusive manner (https://towardsdatascience.com/the-machine-learning-crisis-in-scientific-research-91e61691ae76) in both academia and industrial domains. It has become a buzzword that associated methods are used without further consideration or simply a self-questioning: “Is it really the best option for this problem?”.

I had multiple chances interviewing candidates for Data Scientist roles in my team, and there were a couple of times I asked this question:

Could you please tell me an example problem that you think or know for sure that DL models will fail?

The question was, of course, an open discussion and there is no right or wrong answer, but quite often I found candidates being caught off guard.

There is a myriad of ML toolboxes and platforms now and it has never been this easy to apply an ML model. Again, there is no doubt about all success stories of using DL and I believe there will be more; however, as we all agree that there is no “universal” ML model that works for every case, every model has its Achilles’ heel, and DL is no exception.

Coming back to the interview question, I constructed myself a “thought experiment” (more like a Jupiter notebook experiment in DS language) about a case that naively applying a DL model will fail.

The experiment

Let’s create a synthetic dataset. We assume that we are observing measurements from an unknown function, and we would like to build an ML model to predict the target given sampled independent variable, after being trained with labeled…