“Slowly I learnt the ways of humans: how to ruin, how to hate, how to debase, how to humiliate. And at the feet of my Master I learnt the highest of human skills, the skill no other creature owns: I finally learnt how to lie.” ― Nick Dear, Frankenstein, Based on the Novel by Mary Shelley

On literature, cinema and artificial Intelligence

Mary Shelley’s history about the modern Prometheus has traveled through time and space reaching every generation. At a personal level, the classic tale of Frankenstein and its atemporality appeals to the fear of the unknown exemplified by science and technology. A scientific that plays to be a good, a man that creates a super intelligent being capable of going beyond human limits. Now this fear becomes more relevant than 200 years ago. Shelley’s reflections of a man-made intelligence are nowadays similar the ones we are formulating about Artificial Intelligence (AI). Perhaps there could be a future in which AI could have self-consciousness or even intuition surpassing human capabilities. This same question is recurrent on Shelley’s book published (1823), more than a century before the formal development of Machine Learning. Frankenstein’s creation learnt the human language, he is the vivid incarnation of machine intelligence: He, or It, learns as an algorithm.

Information flow on the cinematographic industry

For most of the AI algorithms, information processing and the knowledge arising from it, are the most desired task of any industry. This is what is called the revelation of the “hide”, which in turns increases the capacity of (automated or human) forecast. From the previous it’s clear that information has a central role, hence industries that generate big data are suitable to benefit more from AI. The film industry has revenues of around $ 136 billion dollars. The audience that a film can reach a stratospheric number of 178 million (a number that doubles the 80 million Netflix and Bitorrent users). Also, the industry generates more than 2,000 high-level productions that take place every year. All this amounts to (possibly) one of the largest sources of information flow. There have not been formal studies on how to make an exact…