Big Data Architecture — The Art of Handling Big Data

Introduction

So, till now we have read about how companies are executing their plans according to the insights gained from Big Data analytics. But have you heard about making a plan about how to carry out Big Data analysis? Not really. What is that? Feeding to your curiosity, this is the most important part when a company thinks of applying Big Data and analytics in its business.

A company thought of applying Big Data analytics in its business and they just casually do so. It seems effortless, isn’t it?

BUT, applying Big Data analytics in any business is never a cakewalk. It is not as easy as it seems to be. It needs a robust Big Data architecture to get the best results out of Big Data and analytics. It is the foundation of Big Data analytics. It can be assumed as the ultimate path a business needs to follow to get their aim fulfilled. The Big Data architects begin designing the path by understanding the goals and objectives the final destination one needs to reach stating the advantages and disadvantages of different paths.

It is a painful task, but it’s achievable with the right planning and the appropriate tools.

Make Your First Move into The Big Data World

The traditional process for designing Big Data architecture goes something like this -

The architect meets with the stakeholders to understand the company’s objectives and then plan the processing framework with appropriate hardware and software systems. Planning this system ahead of time is crucial for success.

When Do I Need Big Data Architecture?

For exploiting Big Data one needs Big Data architecture but not everyone needs one. Data in the order of 100s of GB does not require any kind of architecture. Unless until one does not process data in the order of terabytes or petabytes consistently and might require scaling up in the future, they don’t need Big Data architecture. Additionally, you use Big Data architecture when you want to invest in a Big Data Project and have multiple sources of Big Data.

The Big Data Architecture

Big Data Architecture

Sources Layer

The Big Data sources are the ones that govern the Big Data architecture. The designing of the architecture depends heavily on the data sources. The data is arriving from numerous sources that too in different formats. These include relational databases, company servers and sensors such as IoT devices, third-party data providers, etc. This data can be both batch data as well as real-time data. These sources pile up a huge amount of data in no time. The Big Data architecture is designed such that it is capable of handling this data.

The Big Data sources are the ones that govern the Big Data architecture. The designing of the architecture depends heavily on the data sources. The data is arriving from numerous sources that too in different formats. These include relational databases, company servers and sensors such as IoT devices, third-party data providers, etc. This data can be both batch data as well as real-time data. These sources pile up a huge amount of data in no time. The Big Data architecture is designed such that it is capable of handling this data. Data Ingestion

This is the first layer from which the journey of Big Data arriving from numerous sources begins. This layer takes care of categorizing the data for the smooth flow of data into the further layers of the architecture. The primary goal of this layer is to furnish trouble-free transportation of data into the further layers of data architecture. Generally, Kafka Streams or REST APIs are used for Ingestion.

8 Reasons Why You Should Switch Your Career to Big Data

Storage Layer

This layer is at the receiving end for the Big Data. It receives data from the various data sources and stores it in the most appropriate manner. This layer can even change the format of the data according to the requirements of the system. For example, batch processing data is generally stored in a distributed file storage systems such as HDFS that are capable of storing high volume data that too in different formats. On the other hand, structured data can be stored using RDBMS only. It all depends on the format of the data and the purpose we need it for.

This layer is at the receiving end for the Big Data. It receives data from the various data sources and stores it in the most appropriate manner. This layer can even change the format of the data according to the requirements of the system. For example, batch processing data is generally stored in a distributed file storage systems such as HDFS that are capable of storing high volume data that too in different formats. On the other hand, structured data can be stored using RDBMS only. It all depends on the format of the data and the purpose we need it for. Analysis Layer

The only goal of companies employing Big Data is to gain insights from it and thus make data-driven decisions. To empower users to analyze Big Data, the most important layer in the Big Data architecture is the analysis layer. This analysis layer interacts with the storage layer to gain valuable insights. The architecture requires multiple tools to analyze Big Data. The structured data is easy to handle whereas some advanced tools are needed to analyze the unstructured data.

Batch Processing

Since the data is so huge in size, the architecture needs a batch processing system to filter, aggregate, and process data for advanced analytics. These are long-running batch jobs. This involves reading the data from the storage layer, processing it, and finally writing the outputs to the new files. Hadoop is the most commonly used solution for it. Real-Time Processing

Processing the data arriving in real-time is the hottest trend in the Big Data world. The Big Data architecture, therefore, must include a system to capture and store real-time data. This can be done by simply ingesting the real-time data into a data store for processing. The architecture needs to have a robust system for dealing with real-time data.

BI Layer

This layer receives the final analysis output and replicates it to the appropriate output system. The different types of outputs are for human viewers, applications, and business processes. The whole process of gaining Big Data solutions includes ingesting data from multiple sources, repeated data processing operations, and drawing the results into a report or a dashboard. These reports are then used for making data-driven decisions by the companies.

Challenges

Harnessing Big Data is not an easy task. Obtaining Big Data solutions is an extremely complex task as it requires numerous components to govern data ingestion from multiple data sources. It is a challenging task at hand to build, test, and troubleshoot big data processes. Proper synchronization between the various components is required in order to optimize performance.

Big Data technologies are still evolving. Big Data technologies are evolving new changes that help in building optimized systems. While the Hadoop technologies such as Hive and Pig have stabilized, emerging technologies such as Spark are continuously introducing extensive changes and enhancements with each new release. To choose the right technology according to your business requirements is the key to Big Data architecture.

Implementing Big Data architecture brings a lot of security challenges. The insights depend on centrally stored static data. But accessing this data is a challenging task as the data could be ingested and consumed by multiple applications and platforms. In the era where data breaching is commonplace, implementing a robust security system becomes a necessity to safeguard the data from various thefts. A service-level agreement must be signed with the service provider at the beginning itself to ensure the safety of your data.

HOLD ON!!!

See How Big Data is the Hero for Flipkart