Blame the game, not the player

A tennis player decides to dope before his next game in order to gain an edge over his opponent. A retailer decides to keep their store open on Sundays because his competitor started doing so, too. Coca-cola drops their beverage prices in order to gain an edge in market share, pressuring Pepsi to do the same.

What do all of these hypothetical scenarios in common? They are all examples of what Game Theorists call Prisoner’s Dilemmas.

In Germany, retailers are by law required to close on Sundays. (Photo credit: Unsplash)

The Prisoner’s Dilemma: when everyone loses

In its original form, the Prisoner’s Dilemma can be stated as follows. Two criminals (let’s say they robbed a bank) are arrested and sent to prison, without means of talking to each other. The prosecutor, lacking evidence, makes each of them a deal: they each have the choice of either blaming the other suspect (“defecting”), or remaining silent (“cooperating” with each other). If both remain silent, both of them will serve only 1 year in prison. If one blames the other and the other remains silent, the one talking will walk out, while the other will serve 5 years. If both blame each other, they will both serve 3 years.

Outcomes of the Prisoner’s Dilemma (source)

What would the prisoners do if they act in their own best interests? The first prisoner thinks: “No matter what the other person does, it is always better for me to defect. If he remains silent, I will be free. If he defects, I will only serve 3 years (instead of 5 years that I would serve if I cooperated).” The second prisoner thinks the same, and so, if both act in their own best interests individually, both defect, and both serve 3 years.

However, here is the dilemma: if both were to cooperate, both would be better off (by only serving 1 year).

More generally, we face a Prisoner’s Dilemma anytime when either party gains an edge by not cooperating, but both would be better of if both cooperated. Going back to the examples above: both tennis players would be better off if none dopes, but each individually can gain an edge by…