Introduction

Airbnb has become the first choice for many travelers to utilize not only when looking for accommodation across the world, but also when exploring a city’s before getting there. People would want a “home away from home” when thinking about sleeping over in their destination. Therefore, Airbnb reinvents a unique and inspiring blue ocean into the market, “Blue ocean strategy is the simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low cost to open up a new market space and create new demand.”¹ In Blue oceans, demand is created rather than fought over. Airbnb provides a win-win situation for both customers and hosts; while customers can get accommodation at lower prices, hosts can make money by renting their properties.

To go even further with how Airbnb is utilized in Boston, I have analyzed Boston Airbnb listings from February 2019 to February 2020. The datasets used in this analysis were acquired from Inside Airbnb database under a Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) “Public Domain Dedication” license. The dataset reports the listing activities of homestays in Boston. The dataset incorporates over 6150 property listings including but not limited to hosts info, prices, neighborhoods, amenities, cancellation policy, and reviews.

The analysis and its findings are only observational and not the result of a formal study. General business questions are listed below to guide us through the analysis to create a model that can predict the rental price based on some features.

Business Questions

1. How prices for all Boston’s Airbnb fluctuate throughout the year 2019?

2. What are the peak/off-peak times for Airbnb rental prices in Boston?

3. Who are the hosts with the most number of Airbnb listings?

4. Which neighborhoods have the most number of listing in Boston?

5. Which are the most expensive neighborhoods in Boston?

6. Which are the popular neighborhoods based on the avg number of reviews

7. Which type of room has the majority of listings in Boston Airbnb?

8. What are the…