Based on a previous poll, there was huge interest among BSc, MSc and PhD computer science students to learn about applications of ML in medicine and biology. Most of the students attending the session had studied machine learning algorithms during their undergrad studies, but were interested in learning more about bioinformatics/biology.

My role in the workshop was to deliver a one-hour talk on ML for predicting antibiotic resistance, and then to run a two-hour hands-on workshop for a subset of the students. I aimed to introduce the students to ML applications in identifying antibiotic resistant bacteria, and get them thinking about some of the current limitations of the standard methods we use for ML in applying these to bacterial genome data, and ways to go beyond these.

Introduction to the problem

Bacterial infections that don’t respond to treatment are a growing concern. Currently antimicrobial resistant infections kill over 700,000 people per year, and by 2050 its estimated 10 million people will die from of antimicrobial resistant infections unless we make significant changes to the way we develop and use antibiotics.

Machine learning algorithms that predict antibiotic resistance from whole genome sequences could improve our ability to recognise and contain new resistant strains. In the near future it could be possible to sequence the DNA of the bacteria causing an infection within a few hours of collecting a sample, then analyse this DNA sequence data to predict which antibiotics could be successfully used to treat the infection.

Drug resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the bacteria that cause gonorrhoea is a particularly big problem, with gonorrhoea infections resistant to all available antibiotics showing up around the world. Gonorrhoea is the second most common sexually transmitted infection (STI) in Europe, after chlamydia. Rates of gonorrhoea infection are on the rise, with a 26% increase in cases reported from 2017–2018 in the UK.

Many people who are infected experience no symptoms, which helps infections to spread. If left untreated, the infection can cause infertility in both men and women, or lead to life-threatening ectopic pregnancies. Babies born to mothers with gonorrhoea can develop an eye infection that causes permanent sight loss if not treated.