Randomness and Variability

Now we are finally ready to see where the Random Variable is in all this and more importantly parts that correspond to Randomness & Variability.

Randomness

You see, the events corresponding to your experiment have inherent uncertainty (randomness) associated with it i.e. your two coin toss in above experiment could be HH or HT or TT or TH. You then use probability theory to quantify the uncertainty corresponding to these events.

I appreciate that at the end of the day it is simply semantics but I really liked the word uncertainty as it helps me not bring in my understanding of randomness from other disciplines. This also means that Random Variables in statistics could have been called Uncertain Variables. But they are not called so :( ….. the literature consistently calls them Random Variable so if it helps, you could (as I often) do the translation in your mind to Uncertain Variables.

I explain more on quantifying uncertainty of Random Variables in the latter part of the article.

Variability

In the coin toss experiment, we used the words HEAD & TAIL in our sample space. Instead, we could use numbers to represent them, say I would use 1 for HEAD and 0 for TAIL. In other words, I could have said I am mapping HEAD to 1 and TAIL to 0. Mapping implies a function that does this transformation. Recall from the earlier definition you found on wikipedia or in your google search — “A Random Variable is a function that maps outcomes to real values”.

You may wonder why I chose to assign 1 to HEAD and 0 to TAIL …. could it have been the other way i.e. 0 for HEAD and 1 for TAIL ?. In many ways, you are free with your assignment of (or rather I should say mapping to) numerical value but as you would see with more complex examples there is certain meaning & consistency to these mappings and it mostly depends on your definition of experiment. For e.g. even for a simple single coin toss example, I could justify the assignment of 1 to HEAD by posing my experiment as —” I am interested in observing a HEAD” . I would use 1 (=TRUE) as it indicates a boolean logic for this very experiment definition.

To be not limited to the boolean experiment let’s go through another example. Here I have two coin toss example i.e Ω = {HH,HT,TH,TT} and my definition of experiment is about number of heads observed. So, I would define my (Random) Variable to generate (remember it is a mapper/function) 0 for {TT}, 1 for both{TH} & {HT} and 2 for {HH}.

The Random Variables are generally represented using an uppercase letter. For e.g. for above experiment I would write it as H = {0,1,2}.

This being said, the mapping of outcomes of sample space (Ω={H,T}) to (real) numbers seems pretty deterministic i.e. there is no randomness here in the mapping (function) aspect. This means that it is not the variable part of ‘Random Variable’ that is random rather it represents that we are working with sample space that has uncertainty (randomness) associated with the outcomes.

If you are wondering - Is it simply about assigning a number to an outcome in sample space or there is more to the story then you are on the right path. There is indeed more to it!

You see, the outcomes of a given sample space could be used to define many different experiments. For e.g. this time around you would roll two dice such that if they are indistinguishable (i.e. you do not care about which dice produces which number) then the possible sample space is Ω = {(1,1),(1,2),(1,3),(1,4),(1,5),(1,6), (2,2),(2,3),(2,4),(2,5),(2,6),(3,3),(3,4),(3,5),(3,6),(4,4),(4,5),(4,6),(5,5),(5,6), (6,6)}. There are 21 possible outcomes here. From here on I could pose a few different experiments that would lead to their respective event spaces. One experiment could be — Sum of the two dice greater than 8, other could be — observe when the product of two dice is even, yet another one could be — observe when after subtracting 3 from the product the outcome is even and many more.

This creation of experiments using a sample space is where the Random Variable starts to use its ‘functional’ powers and map the outcomes to real numbers depending on how you have posed your experiment definition.

But why call it a Variable? I wondered for a long time about this aspect and the best (rather I should say only) explanation I could come up with is that often your task is not about a single sample space. The final result of your task may depend on many phenomenons which have their respective sample spaces. You would be applying algebra on these sample spaces and therefore you would end up adding, subtracting, multiplying the outcomes. Since you typically add/subtract/multiply variables and not functions they ended up calling them variables.