Calculating the odds you sit next to your ex on a flight this holiday season

Credit Suhyeon Choi at Unsplash

Recently, I got on a flight from Boston to Ft. Lauderdale to visit my family for the holidays. I was running late and was one of the last people to be allowed to board. I made my way to the back of the plane, found my row, and asked the person sitting in the aisle if she could let me into my middle seat. She looked up from her laptop — and it was my ex! As we were catching up during the flight, I couldn’t stop thinking about how unlikely it was that we had booked tickets independently and yet we ended up right next to each other. What is the chance of that? Let’s calculate it!

Three things needed to happen for us to end up sitting next to each other:

1) We decided to fly on the same day

2) We bought the same flight on the same day

3) The airline assigned us adjacent seats

We can write the probability that we sit next to each other as follows:

In this analysis, we will make the simplifying assumption that the airline assigns seats at random to the passengers even though in reality someone can pay extra to get the seat of their choosing.

Let’s take it as given that both of us were going to travel home in the week of December 16 to December 20, 2019 and that we decided our travel day uniformly at random. Similarly, let’s suppose that there are 5 flight options a day and that we chose the flight uniformly at random. Our equation is now:

We need to calculate the probability that an airline assigns us adjacent seats. Airplanes can have many different seating arrangements but let’s suppose all airplanes have 30 rows, with two groups of 3 seats per row. This is actually pretty close to the actual seat map of the Airbus A320, which is flown by Spirit Airlines.

Calculating this probability seems daunting but we can simplify things for now by pretending the airplane only has one row. In this case, there are 15 (6 choose 2) possible pairs of seats for me and my ex, but only four of these pairs are adjacent seats (window & middle, aisle & middle on the left and right sides). Therefore, the probability of getting adjacent seats is 4/15.

If there are two rows, there are 66 (12 choose 2) possible pairs of seats but only 8 of them are adjacent (4 in each row). We can extrapolate from this pattern to arrive at the following formula, where n is the number of rows on the airplane:

Plugging into this formula, the probability is 0.007449. We can also verify this answer via simulation.

To get the final answer, we plug into our first equation, and get 0.0000119 or about 1 in 100,000. This is about 30 times less likely getting struck by lightning once in your lifetime!

Safe travels and Happy Holidays. I hope you spend them catching up with friends and family :)