Data Science vs Business Intelligence: same but completely different

Image by analogicus from Pixabay

This is part 2 of this series. See part 1 here

Unlike big tech companies, businesses, in general, are only dipping their toes into Data Science and AI. As always with early adoption, it doesn’t go easy — most of the projects do not advance beyond Proof of Concept phase, which is considered a fail from a business perspective. There is no published figure on how many Data Science projects fail, but I’m sure it is even higher than the disappointing 85% figure for Big Data projects.

Why is the failure rate so high? Mainly, because Data Science is new. It brings new types of collaboration, requirements, and culture into established corporate environments. Complications caused by these novelties are often hard to see in the beginning. But as they start unravelling, they often become too difficult at some point. Unfortunately, these complications are not usually listed in all sorts of marketing pitches selling AI and Data Science to businesses.

Business Intelligence is an umbrella term that describes concepts and methods to improve business decision making by using fact-based support systems [1]. Modern Business intelligence is not just business reporting. It is a mature system that provides interactive dashboards, what-if planning, mobile analytics, etc. It also includes large back-end parts for maintaining control and governance around reporting.

Since BI is an umbrella term, it can be different from company to company. For some, it can be just a basic Key Performance Indicator (KPI) reporting with all supporting infrastructure, other companies may use advanced predicting methods based on statistical models and advanced tools. But regardless of methods or tools used — they provide facts for decision making to business stakeholders, according to their requirements.

But hey! Isn’t Data Science doing the same? Yes it is.

From a Business Process standpoint, there is not much difference between Data Science and Business Intelligence — they both support business decision making based on data facts. Probably this is why it is often…