Deep Learning for Data Integration

This is the third article in the series Deep Learning for Life Sciences. In the previous two posts, I showed how to use Deep Learning on Ancient DNA and Deep Learning for Single Cell Biology. Now we are going to discuss how to utilize multiple sources of biological information, OMICs data, in order to achieve more accurate modelling of biological systems by Deep Learning.

Biological and biomedical research has been tremendously benefiting last decade from the technological progress delivering DNA sequence (genomics), gene expression (transcriptomics), protein abundance (proteomics) and many other levels of biological information commonly referred to as OMICs. Despite individual OMICs layers are capable of answering many important biological questions, their combination and consequent synergistic effects from their complementarity promise new insights into behavior of biological systems such as cells, tissues and organisms. Therefore OMICs integration represents the contemporary challenge in Biology and Biomedicine.

In this article, I will use Deep Learning with Keras and show how integrating multi-OMICs data reveals hidden patterns not visible in individual OMICs.

Single Cells make Big Data

The problem of data integration is not entirely new for Data Science. Imagine we know that a person looks at certain images, reads certain texts and listens to certain music. Image, text and sound are very different types of data, however we can try to combine those types of data in order to build e.g. a better recommender system which achieves a higher accuracy of capturing the interests of the person. As for Biology and Biomedicine, the idea of data integration has only recently arrived here, however it was actively developed with the biological angle resulting in several interesting methodologies such as mixOmics, MOFA, Similarity Network Fusion (SNF), OnPLS/JIVE/DISCO, Bayesian Networks etc.

One problem which all the listed above integrative OMICs methods face is the curse of dimensionality, i.e. inability to work in high-dimensional space with limited…