Deep Learning for Clinical Diagnostics

This is the fourth article in the series Deep Learning for Life Sciences. In the previous posts, I showed how to use Deep Learning on Ancient DNA, Deep Learning for Single Cell Biology and Deep Learning for Data Integration. Now we are going to dive into Biomedicine and learn why and how we should use Bayesian Deep Learning for patient safety.

Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) provided a major advance for our understanding of pathogenic mechanisms leading to common human diseases. Nevertheless, amount of data still remains a bottleneck for analysis in Biomedicine. In contrast to Data Science, millions of examples are rather uncommon in Biomedicine while high dimensional data are quite typical, therefore Machine Learning has very limited applications in Biomedicine. Lack of data and high-dimensional parameter space hinder precision in clinical diagnostics bringing a lot of false predictions which do not hold in clinical trials. When data are sparse/scarce/noisy and high-dimensional, Bayesian Statistics helps to make generalizable predictions.

Here we will discuss how to implement Bayesian Deep Learning with PyMC3 in order to ensure patient safety and provide more accurate and intelligent predictions for clinical diagnostics.

Why to be Bayesian when running Deep Learning?

In the previous post I explained that performing a statistical analysis you should pay particular attention to the balance between the number of statistical observations, N, and the dimension of your space, i.e. number of features, P. Depending on the amount of data, you can select between Bayesian Statistics, Frequentist Statistics and Machine/Deep Learning.

Deep Learning makes sense to use only when you have a lot of data

So it makes sense to use Deep Learning when you have a lot of data because you can abandon the dull world of Linear Algebra and jump into the rabbit hole of non-linear mathematics. In contrast, Biomedicine usually works in the opposite limit, N<<P…