Member-only story Do Stocks Provide a Positive Expected Return?

We use Statistics and Simulation to Quantify how Confident we can be that the S&P 500 will Beat Cash (Treasury Bills) Tony Yiu · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 10 min read · May 26, 2019 -- 4 Share

If you would like to run the code yourself, you can find it on my Github here.

One of the bedrock assumptions of investing and retirement finance is that stocks will deliver a higher return over time versus safer investment assets like cash or Treasury bonds. But do they?

In this post, we will examine the numbers, run some simulations, and ultimately quantify our confidence level that the S&P 500 (an investible index of large U.S. firms) will provide us a positive expected return in excess of U.S. Treasury Bills (cash).

A few definitions: Nominal Returns = Investment returns that are NOT inflation adjusted Real Returns = Investment returns that ARE inflation adjusted

Why Should We Care?

Despite all the investment options we have today, the S&P 500 is still the workhorse of most portfolios. For example, the popular SPY, an ETF (Exchange Traded Fund) that tracks the S&P 500, has net assets of over $278 Billion as of May 23, 2019. And it is just one of many funds that track the S&P 500.

Even if you didn’t buy the S&P 500 outright, you probably own some. Let’s assume you are currently 30 years old and invested in the Vanguard 2055 Target Date Fund in your 401k plan (designed for people planning to retire in the year 2055). That fund invests 54% of its assets in the Total Stock Market Index Fund which is just about the same thing as the S&P 500.

So basically everyone has at least some of their money in it.

The Flip Side of Return is Risk

One thing that you will hear a lot working in finance is that “There is no free lunch.” (Except at Google, sorry lame joke) What finance folk mean when they say this is that there is no excess return without some accompanying risk.

Let’s think about what this means.

Risk Free Benchmark Rate