If you apply for a position that involves AB testing, SQL or any type of user experience research, chances are your interviewer’s favorite question is: “Here is a confidence interval from the XYZ experiment. What does it mean?” There are two ways to answer the questions:

“There is 95% probability/plausibility/likelihood that the population parameter lies in the interval.” “If we repeat the experiment infinitely many times, 95% of the experiments will capture the population parameter in their confidence intervals.”

If you answer the first way, unfortunately, you’ve pretty much failed the interview. Most people can’t tell the difference between the two statements, and can get away with it. But as a data expert, you cannot. The first statement is interpreting Bayesian credible interval. The second, frequentist confidence interval.

Why So Confusing

If you have never taken a statistics inference class, you may think the second statement is just a paraphrase of the first. In fact, the difference is profound. This boils down to two opposite ideologies about probability: frequentist and Bayesian.

The Bayesian defines probability as a “belief.” A belief can be strong or weak, and is modified continuously as new evidence emerges. The belief itself is described by a probability distribution. For example, my belief about average user checkout time can be something like this: “There is 3.5% probability that average check out time is between 44~46s; 34% probability that average checkout time is between 11~24s.” Notice that I’m not making a statement about what the average check out time is precisely, I’m making statement about different ranges, and the probability of the ranges.

The frequentist defines probability by “frequent trials.” A frequentist believes that a population parameter is fixed (for example, diabetes rate, conversion rate, average checkout time), and the only way to find it is through many experiments. Because real world experiment is often expensive, we use central limit theorem to derive from a single experiment the same sampling distribution we would get by conducting many experiments.