The difference between significance testing in it’s research based/academic origins and it’s evolution in more dynamic application based roles of data science & analytics

Let’s start with the simple definition of a significance test in statistics.

Tests for statistical significance indicate whether observed differences in variable(s) of interest ( between different samples/groups) indicate some real differences(usually after a treatment has been applied) or if the differences are simply there due to chance/sampling error.

There are more ways of defining significance testing. All of them , more or less say this same thing.

Caution: This is not a tutorial for mastering significance testing.There’s many of them out there. This is an overview of the different methodologies used in significance testing in more research based / academic areas , as it is still taught in college courses (at least in my experience) versus its evolution in more application based areas of data science and analytics. Hopefully , this post will also show that not being entirely familiar with the former does not affect one’s ability to work with the latter.

Prologue

Let’s say I have an idea for a change. This change could be a new method of teaching Math to high schoolers that I believe would help them get better grades on their AP tests. This change could be a slightly different looking landing page on my e-commerce website that I believe leads to visitors spending more time on my website. Whatever the idea, I need a way to test that it does induce the change I think it will.

Sticking with the e-commerce website example, I randomly pick visitors and separate them into two groups, group A and group B. I show the old landing page to the visitors in group A (this is my control group) and I show the supposedly new and improved landing page to the visitors in group B ( this is my treatment group). I then measure the average time spent on my website by the visitors in each group and lo and behold! The mean time spent on my website by the visitors in group B is higher than that of the visitors in group A!

Now all I need to do is rule out the possibility of this difference in mean times spent on my website between groups occurring due to chance. The possibility that maybe my new page had nothing to do with this difference, and I just got…