Great! We survived the theoretical part, so let’s look at an example in R.

Alright, so what did we just spend 10 minutes reading about?

Dealing with multidimensional data can be tough, so if we can “cut” down the number of dimensions, we can make the data way easier to look at and we can subjectively try to intepret the underlying factors.

We will look at the Olympic decathlon data (Johnson and Wichern p.499) that you can get with

od.data <- read.table("http://static.lib.virginia.edu/statlab/materials/data/decathlon.dat")

Edit: If you are trying this out for the first time, you will get an error if you are not adding a matrix translation. This is done by:

od.data <- as.matrix(od.data)

rownames(od.data) <- colnames(od.data) <- c("100m","LJ","SP","HJ","400m","100mH","DS","PV","JV","1500m")

First let’s try 3 factors. The output is:

By default, factanal provides ML estimates and Varimax rotation.

First is the uniqueness. It represents ^Ψ from earlier. If the uniqueness is high, the variance cannot be described by any of the factors, thus the name uniqueness or specific variance. It cannot be explained by some underlying factor. This is the case for the 1500m run and vica versa for SP (Shot put). If we subtract the uniqueness from 1, we get the communality and it will then tell how much variance is explained by the 3 factors.

The loadings represent ^L from earlier. I have sorted the data and we can easily see that shot put (SP) and discus (DS) have high loadings relative to the other variables in factor 1, implying thename “arm strength” for this factor. Specifically it means that e.g. shot put has correlation of 0.915 with factor 1 and a smaller correlation with the other two factors.

We are also interested in “Cumulative var”, the cumulative proportion of variance explained, and it should be a “high” number, where high is subjective. We should probably try fitting 4 factors, as I don’t think that 0.554 is that high and we might be able to do better. The low p-value in the end also rejects the hypothesis that 3 factors are sufficient.

The output is now:

This looks more promising. 4 factors are sufficient (according to the p-value) and we have succesfully reduced the number of variables from 10 to 4. The interpretation of the factors is subjective, we cannot explicitly name them, but a good guess could be “arm strength”, “leg strength”, “speed/acceleration” and “running endurance” by looking at where the correlation is high for the variables. Javelin and 100m hurdles have high uniqueness and does not fit well into any of the factors. Maybe a little bit in factor 1 and 2, respectively.

The most important part is finding the number of factors. From here you can play around with estimation and rotation methods and sharpen the focus of the microscope, but it’s not that crucial.