Determining Differences

ANOVA, or Analysis of Variance, measures the likelihood that the mean is the same across a series of groups within the data. It does this by measuring the “between group variance” and “within group variance”.

Between Group Variance

The between group variance sums: The mean of each group subtracted from the overall data set mean, squared, divided by the degrees of freedom.

Let’s bring that into English. The mean of all values in the trimmed data set is $788.55. The means by neighborhood are in the chart above. For each of those means, we subtract $788.55, square the result, and sum those. The degrees of freedom is the number of sample means (7) minus one.

Within Group Variance

Simply put, for each group, this is the number of groups (7) minus 1 times the group’s variance. We then sum each of those values and divide by the total number of observations (25,028) minus the number of sample means (7).

ANOVA

The F-value, the statistic associated with ANOVA, is the between group variance divided by the within group variance and creates a distribution from which we calculate the likelihood (p-value) that all groups have the same mean:

The way to interpret the above is if the p-value (Pr(>F)) is less than our significance level (conventionally, 0.05), we “reject the null hypothesis” that all of the means are equal and conclude that the mean values between groups is different.

This does not tell us which groups are different, just that there are differences.

This finding leaves me with questions. Mainly, which are different?

Pairwise Comparisons and Tukey HSD

Pairwise comparisons and Tukey HSD (“Honestly Significant Difference”…yes, that’s really the name) are a way to look at the specific pairs of values and determine the significance of their difference.

Again, let’s make that real. Is Beacon Hill more expensive than Downtown? Is Kenmore more expensive than the North End?

The way to interpret the pairwise table below on the left is for each pair (i.e. North End and West End in the top left), what is the probability that the means are equal? Lower values means it’s less likely that the means are equal.

For the Tukey HSD, which calculates the difference of means and creates a confidence interval around that difference, look for whether the 95% confidence interval (‘lwr ’and ‘upr’) contains 0 in the range. If it does, then the means are not significantly different because 0 —indicating no difference — is a plausible value. Otherwise, the differences are significant. If ‘diff’ is negative, the first neighborhood is cheaper than the second, and vice versa for positive.