Growing up I was always interested in science. In the fifth grade, I remember working on a science project that involved making homemade glue. In middle school, I spent a month reading about glacial erosion and built a small demo to present to my earth science class. In 2005 I started school at Midwood High School in Brooklyn. In my sophomore year, I took AP chemistry which set the course for my subsequent academic and professional career path. I was obsessed with chemistry. The rules of chemistry made logical sense and required less rote memorization than other science courses. During my sophomore year of high school, I took effort to get involved in the available science programs at my high school. Midwood offered programs like Medsci and the Intel Science Program, both of which I joined. Medsci was for students who planned on being sentenced to premed and Intel was for students who wanted to work in research labs.

Through my participation in Intel, I started volunteering at an organic chemistry research lab at Long Island University (LIU). While there I worked on the synthesis of a chemotherapeutic agent, Prunustatin A, though to no success. Funny enough, I saw that a complete synthesis of this drug was published in 2015 (6 years later).

My First of mostly Research Failures (Source)

In 2009 I started undergrad at Brandeis University where I studied chemistry with a minor in math and a self proclaimed minor in physics. I ended up writing a senior thesis on the synthesis of N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHC) for small molecule activation of greenhouse (GH) gases. The idea was to use these NHC transition metal complexes to capture GH gases like methane and carbon dioxide for clean energy use.

One of the few NHC complexes that wasn’t uncrystallizable rust (Source)

This led to a second author publication (I know, practically a coronation). Though my focus was on synthetic chemistry while in undergrad, I developed a strong interest in math and physics which led me to pursue a Ph.D in chemical physics at Cornell University in the Ananth Group.