Member-only story Fun with the Binomial Distribution

Understanding the Lesser Known Cousin of the Normal Distribution and How to Apply It Tony Yiu · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 9 min read · Jul 28, 2019 -- 10 Share

Everyone knows and loves the normal distribution. It is used in a huge variety of applications such as investment modeling, A/B testing, and manufacturing process improvement (six sigma).

But people are less familiar with the binomial distribution. That’s a shame because the binomial distribution is really useful. Have you ever been asked something like:

“Given 10 flips of a fair coin, what is the probability of getting 6 heads?”

Probability (especially back of the napkin probability calculations) is not my favorite thing in the world. So when I first learned about the binomial distribution, I thought, “Yes, I never have to worry about coin flip probability questions again!”

That’s because the results of coin flips follow the binomial distribution. I should emphasize that the law of large numbers applies here. To be technically correct, I should say that if were to repeatedly perform the same set of experiments (flipping the coin 10 times) over and over, the number of heads that we observe across all those sets would follow the binomial distribution.

Don’t worry, I will illustrate this in detail shortly.

What is the Binomial Distribution

First let’s start with the slightly more technical definition — the binomial distribution is the probability distribution of a sequence of experiments where each experiment produces a binary outcome and where each of the outcomes is independent of all the others.

A single coin flip is an example of an experiment with a binary outcome. Coin flips meet the other binomial distribution requirement as well — the outcome of each individual coin flip is independent of all the others. Just to be clear, the outcomes of the experiment don’t need to be equally likely as they are with flips of a fair coin — the following things also meet the prerequisites of the binomial distribution: