On the other hand, Audience-based input design involves the audience for completion by inserting their set of constraints, which adds more experiential value. An example of this is ‘Phase’, a generative type tool created by type designer Elias Hanzer, developed by Florian Zia that reacts to a manual slider that manipulates its form in real-time or sounds through voice input.

My input in creating my custom type. Visit: https://www.eliashanzer.com/phase/

The experimental nature that is in generative design, in general, allows us creators to go in deeper when it comes to experimenting when possibilities are now endless. It might be liberating to some, now that this generative tool, not only does it generate a boundless amount of iterations to our design, but it also buys us time. To some extent, it probably does sound intimidating now that this kind of technology available today can create more iterations than we ever could, realizing limitless potentials that we could ever imagine. So what does this mean for us?

Modern Problem Requires Modern Solution

The question “will AI take my job?” sounds quite outdated for designers now that it has been answered with a “No” since creative endeavor is something that can’t be hard-wired on a human-level experience (at least for now), and computational creativity is still a growing area of research. But, there’s a catch.

With the ever-growing workplace demands and what feels like an intensified competition for some, the need for deeper and wider experimentation to seek for a difference that will stand out from trends and similarities also intensifies as mediocrity becomes a foul net to stay away from. But this doesn’t have to be scary. The tool’s potential to, for example, nail a dynamic brand identity or to create a real-time data visualization is immense and impactful that it could possibly be a game-changer in the future, which comes with its pitfalls too. The reality is that while its ability to flawlessly generate possibilities may replace designers of today, it certainly will not replace designers of tomorrow. Therefore, with this powerful tool in our hands today, how do we survive and thrive for tomorrow?

Associate professor of computer science at Georgetown University Cal Newport explains in his book ‘Deep Work’ that the two groups that he claims are poised to thrive in the new economy (a result of unprecedented growth and impact of technology that are massively restructuring our current economy) are those who can work creatively with intelligent machines and those who are stars in their field.

The power that we have as designers is actually immeasurable: to make and break rules at the same time. The decision-makers that are constantly reimagining the definition of beauty in what we use, what we see, and what we experience every day. Our future creative endeavor in design could perhaps be an open collaboration between man & highly-intelligent machines as much it is today with our devices and software. The idea may sound ludicrous now but it may become the new norm in the future.

Cal Newport also generously points out the two core abilities to thrive in the new economy in ‘Deep Work’: The ability to quickly master hard things and the ability to produce at an elite level, in terms of both quality and speed. The ability to quickly master hard things allows you to adapt to changes in the new economy easier. The accelerating rate of the ever-evolving technology might frighten those who are unable to keep up and have bigger chances to be left out as demands themselves will adapt and evolve to what’s available in the market. The spare time to learn new a skill or software you haven’t had the chance to delve into might be worth investing now for the long run. Excelling at what you do so differently that no one does it like you do sounds like a solid investment too. Technology does not and will not stop anytime soon, and for the millions of years that we’ve evolved as a species, this time around is no different. Here, I’m not nor will I ever intend to go against traditional, hands-on medium such as prints. The main objective is to fully utilize and adapt to technological advancement.

To loosely quote from a design talk I attended this year, “We upgrade our devices every day, so why not ourselves & our workflow?”