I’ve been invited to give a talk about my experience in Data Science hackathons at DataFest 6, the biggest Data Science and Machine Learning conference in Russia. I decided to discuss common mistakes when organizing such events and how to avoid them. The recording of my presentation was published recently (the talk in Russian with English subs available). I noticed the following commentary to the video (translated from Russian):

This dude came to us and suggested we combine solutions and split the prize. We refused and then he won and we haven’t ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Actually, there is a cool story behind this one.

The Story

The Hackathon took place in Moscow after a few successful previous ones held by the same organizer in Saint Petersburg, where I was a remote participant (I was studying in Finland at the time). As usual, this time it was allowed to participate from another city, but I decided to go offline.

It started on Friday evening, the deadline was set on the midday of Sunday. The total prize pool of “Moscow AI Hack” was about $6k, with $1.5k to the winner of each of the following tracks:

Predict the price of gasoline in various regions of Russia (time-series tabular data, Kaggle competition by Gazprom);

Predict “fitness” of the certain car for a given user with tabular data and pictures of cars (Kaggle competition by True North, a Moscow-based startup);

Detect errors and “anomalies” in Gazprom’s banners (Computer Vision task; no clear metric was provided, although dataset contained a lot of high-resolution photos);

Best business solution (open track, provided datasets must be used to be eligible to get a prize).

After looking through all the datasets and carefully reading all the tasks, I decided to focus on the second one — the track from True North. I created a baseline solution on Friday, went home and spend the whole day engineering new features, training different models, and tuning their hyperparameters on Saturday remotely. At the end of the day, I was completely exhausted and run out of ideas. I was in top3 among 26 teams, though.

All three teams in the top3 were solo participants. Me and the second guy were just a few points apart, while the participant from 1st place somehow managed to get a much better score than anyone else. Given the “winner takes it all” policy, I knew I had no chance to win it by myself because of the margin in scores, lack of time, and the competition dynamics. The strategy was simple: I should merge with someone from the top of the leaderboard; if our solutions were diverse enough, such a merge would boost our shared score.

I ask the guy from the second place if he wanted to team up and combine our solutions. For a while, he was thinking and then replied he would give me the answer the next day. I went to sleep and the following morning I saw that top1 and top2 have merged into one team.

My chances to win decreased dramatically. That was a little bit frustrating, but I didn’t want to give up, not just yet. I had to find another team.

I went to the hackathon’s place to look for someone to team up with. I have offered almost everyone in top10 to merge our teams and split the prize, but no one agreed. Looking back, I think there could be multiple reasons for that: partly because the deadline was getting really close and they lost hope to win; partly because the split ratio (50% of prize to me and 50% to their team, no matter the size of a team) didn’t seem as fair to them (while actually, it’s was more than fair); partly because I didn’t look like an experienced Data Scientist so maybe they thought that I was just some random dude (and there are a lot of these on hackathons); maybe I wasn’t convincing enough; maybe they were waiting for a shakeup on the leaderboard; maybe the reason was lying in “unknown unknown”. Anyway, it didn’t matter.

That’s what I looked like at that time. It was hard to believe that such a guy could be an experienced Data Scientist (even for me, even right now)

The moment I realized that I had no chances to win, a Senior Data Scientist from True North joined me at my working place. We discussed the task, the leaderboard, the approaches, and other stuff. We were having a nice conversation when I asked him how were they going to earn money with that model? After having some talk, it turned out that the objective of the task wasn’t optimal, i.e. they made a regression task, but in reality, they needed some sort of recommendation. Also, the predicted target wasn’t picked right.

I proposed another pipeline, which could boost the efficiency of one of their processes. We discussed the settings of experiments to be done, metrics, measures of success, and a few other things. I could see he was very into my way of thinking and I liked that he liked that.

I ran all the experiments we discussed as fast as I could — it took me about one hour. Fifteen minutes before the deadline, I started working on the presentation. I barely managed to finish it before the time was up. While giving that speech, I was nervous because of the non-pixel-perfect design of my presentation. However, I managed to overcome it by keeping in mind that even though my slides were not pretty, but they were valuable for the company.

In the end, I didn’t win the Kaggle competition (I finished 3rd), but my solution was voted the “Best business solution” and I won the “Open solution” track. I also got an invite for an interview. In two weeks, I went on with the project as Data Scientist for True North.

It’s always funny to look back.

If someone had agreed to merge with me that day, we would end up 2nd or 3rd in Kaggle competition. I wouldn’t win and get my first job. In fact, I was very lucky to be turned down by everybody. The following events would be different for me, but no doubt it would be cool anyways.