Figure (A)

(Revised on October 13, 2022)

If you were asked to separate the above trees one by one, which tree will be the first one to start with? You may pick the one to the left because it stands alone by itself. After removing that tree, what is the next tree that is easy to separate? Probably the one in the bottom left in the big cluster. After removing that tree, which one is the next? Probably the one in the upper left, and so forth. Here I present a very important intuition: an outlier should be the easiest to be isolated. Just like peeling an onion, an outlier is on the outside layer. That’s the intuition of Isolate Forest to find outliers.

Isolation Forest is fast and does not consume much memory because it does not use any distance measures to detect anomalies. This advantage makes it suitable for large data sizes and high-dimensional problems.

(A) What Is the Isolate Forest?

Many outlier detection methods profile the norm data points first, then identify those observations that do not conform to the patterns of the normal data. The Isolation Forest or IForest, proposed by Liu, Ting, and Zhou (2008), departs from those methods. Rather than profiling normal data points in order to find outliers, IForest identifies anomalies directly. It applies a tree structure to isolate every observation. Anomalies will be the data points first to be singled out; whereas normal points tend to hide deep in the tree. They call each tree the Isolation Tree or iTree. Their algorithm builds an ensemble of iTrees. Anomalies are those observations that have short average path lengths on the iTrees.

Figure (A) uses a partition map and a tree to explain how iTree isolates the data points. The red dot is the farthest from the other dots, then the green dot, then the blue dot. In the partition map, it takes only one “cut” to separate the red dot from the others. The second cut is for the green dot, and the third cut is for the blue dot, and so on. The more cuts it takes to separate a dot, the deeper it is in the tree. The inverse of the number of cuts is the anomaly score. The tree structure on the right of Figure (A) tells the same story. It takes one split to single out the red dot, then the second split to…