Having a Good Consulting Job: Why I Go Back to School to Study Computer Science Thu Vu · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 5 min read · Oct 23, 2019 -- 1 Share

Photo by Avel Chuklanov on Unsplash

Shortly after my Master's graduation, I was lucky enough to have landed a good job as an analytics consultant for a large company. I have great colleagues and growth opportunities.

My first university degree is in Economics. I even finished a Master in Development Economics, which was my big interest back then, and still is. But after graduation a few years ago, I ended up working as a data analyst and now am geared toward a data science/ software engineer career. Gradually I took into serious consideration the option to obtain a university degree in Computer Science. I would need to work and study part-time.

It was a difficult decision. Maybe I was getting crazy!?

Besides the fact that it would cost me all of my savings, the idea of spending at least 3–to 4 years studying scared the sh*t out of me. Not to mention if I’m not careful enough I might burn myself out and jeopardize my relationships along the way. And most apparently, I would have to say goodbye to the few extra hours curling in bed in the morning which I so much love! I read up hundreds of articles, posts, forum threads that I could possibly find online in the hope of finding some guidance.

There are several contradictory opinions about the value and the need for a Computer Science degree if you are already working in the field. After all, a lot of people who are self-taught have become successful engineers, developers, and tech leaders. Furthermore, there are plenty of learning resources online and boot camps. I have also self-taught myself a lot of important computer and programming skills. If so, what is the point of getting a degree?

Here is my own take on the value of a formal program in Computer Science from a learner’s perspective.

1. The unknown-unknowns: You don’t know what you don’t know

Photo by N. on Unsplash

We tend to live in some sort of “bubble”, professionally and personally. We hang out with people we know, people similar to us. We work with colleagues of a similar background…