How AI Can Make You The President

For politicians aiming for a higher seat of power, there is an immense power in understanding artificial intelligence-technologies — no matter the ethics. Jacob Bergdahl · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 8 min read · Jun 4, 2019 -- Share

The year is 2012. Skyfall is running in cinema, Psy’s Gangnam Style is shattering records on the music charts, and Barack Obama is soon to be reelected as president of the United States of America.

The race for the American presidency had been close. The democratic candidate Barack Obama and the republican candidate Mitt Romney had been neck-in-neck. Ultimately, as is often the case, it came down to a few swing states. Every single vote mattered, as Barack Obama executed the largest artificial intelligence (AI) operation ever seen in politics. Four years later, Donald Trump would trump that operation by using AI on an even bigger scale to win against Hilary Clinton, and over the following years, various leaders around Europe would also incorporate AI into their campaign strategies. Just like commercial companies had targeted consumers through machine learning, so too would politicians — no matter the ethics.

The Right Person For The Job

For George R. R. Martin, selecting a ruler is easy. All he has to do is to write it down, and anyone can be sitting on the Iron Throne. It was a little bit more complicated for Barack Obama, but he discovered a person who could do something similar. Obama hired a machine learning expert to his campaign team: Rayid Ghani. Ghani used analytical tools to gather voter data from social media, as well as other sources, in order to predict how likely individual voters were to support Obama, whether they could easily be persuaded into voting for someone else, and how likely they were to actually be at the polling stations come election day (Domingos 2017). His team ran 66,000 simulations every night, and based on the results, they knew exactly what doors to knock, who to call, and what to say.

The Romney team could only watch. They could tell that the Obama team put up campaigns in very specific areas, but they didn’t know why. They could tell that the Obama team was knocking on doors in very specific neighborhoods, but they didn’t know why. And they could tell that the…