How can people become more data-driven in their work?

The rate at which data is being generated by business and the world at large is rapidly exceeding the speed at which individuals are equipping themselves to work with data.

In many fields of endeavor the need for people to develop greater skills in dealing with data and to become more data-driven in their decision making has already been explicitly recognized. Increasingly, data which offers a high degrees of intelligence and insight is being ignored in favour a ‘gut feel’ approach to critical business decisions. In a previous article, I outlined the case for greater general math skills in our working population.

Since I highlighted this glaring and growing gap between the amount of data available and our ability to use it, I’ve had a lot of questions from people about how someone can become more data-driven in their work. Often these questions have come from professionals who want to become more skilled at working with data. Often they have come from leaders who have noticed that many of their people tend to shy away from data or are nervous in dealing with it.

You don’t have to be a math genius to work with data, In fact you don’t really have to be able to do any math or statistics at all. But you do need to be willing to look at data and to be aware of when math or statistics might be needed. And you need access to someone who can do the math and statistics if you don’t feel qualified to do it.

I’ve done numerous workshops to help people develop a data-driven mindset. In my workshops I reduce this down to three components or ‘mental actions’ that people should always take in any problem solving situation where data may be available. Here they are.

1. DTA — Don’t Trust Anyone not wielding data

The first and most critical step to becoming more data-driven is to recognize the difference between a hypothesis and a hypothesis that is supported by data. To illustrate this, I often give my audiences a hypothetical situation where a senior member of their organization has made a claim, for example: “Moving to a new headquarters has negatively impacted our sales”.

In a data-driven organization, this will only be entertained if supported by data that…