Getting an internship in Machine Learning as an undergraduate student is tough. Really tough… Most of the well-known companies are looking for Ph.D. students with publications in prestigious journals. How to increase the chances of getting an internship in ML if you can’t satisfy the above?

Photo by Hunters Race on Unsplash

Last year, I have spent hours sending applications to apply for Machine Learning/AI internships. As an Electronic Engineering student, I’ve found it particularly difficult to get even an interview, even though I had some relevant experience in Machine Learning. During my search for internships, I have noticed a few common things which companies are looking for. Based on these facts, I have decided to change my strategy for sending CVs, which finally resulted in me getting a job as a Machine Learning Research Intern. If you are planning to apply for Machine Learning internships, or you are struggling to get one, I hope that this article will help you land your dream job!

I also wrote another article that helps you prepare for the interview. Link is here.

Big companies = Big competition

Photo by Paweł Czerwiński on Unsplash

The first mistake I made, was to apply to big, well-known companies. Companies such as Google, Amazon or Apple are getting hundreds of applications per day and it is very difficult to get even through the first recruitment stage for an internship. If you feel that you have goods skills in Machine Learning, with substantial experience in this field then go for it. Otherwise, it might be better to focus on targeting smaller, less known companies to maximize your chances of getting hired. For example, have a look at the required basic qualifications for Machine Learning Intern at Amazon:

Internship requirements for Machine Learning Internship at Amazon, found on Linkedin

Woah! You see, that is what I meant by saying tough requirements. Preferably, you should be a P.h.D. student with several publications in Machine Learning. If you are undergraduate, like me, you are clearly at the disadvantage here.