The Washington Post has done a great job to obtain the once secretive database maintained by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) called ARCOS ( Automated Reports and Consolidated Ordering System) that tracks how every controlled substance moves from the manufacturer to the hands of patients. By digging into the database, we can get a glimpse of where did all the opioids that have devastated many Americans came from.

In this article, I will focus on Mingo County, West Virginia, a rural county at the border with Kentucky that has a population of only 3,000. It is the focal point of the national news coverage about the epidemic mainly because of who bad things were happening there. From 2006–2012, more than 38 million doses of opioids were shipped there, enough for more than 1800 dose of the drug per person per year. While Washington Post has a very nice interactive dashboard to quickly show preliminary findings in the county by county data, I have decided to take a deep dive into the Mingo County data and see if I can spot anything interesting. If you also want to play with the data, just download it from the Washington Post’s website.

Let’s go right into it.

So in each entry, it includes information about what drug was transferred (brand name, what type and dosage), who is buying it (usually the retail pharmacy, but sometimes a chain pharmacy or a medical practitioner) and who is submitting the report (that’s who the drug is transferring from, in this case, it’s always the distributor). With this information, we can retrace the Manufacturer → Distributor → Retailer link.

First, let’s look at the retailer level:

The first thing that jumps out is that three retail pharmacies sold 70% of the opioids, with Strosnider selling a whopping 4 million dose in 2007, that’s 1,300 doses per person in the county. Strosnider is the company that controls two Sav-rite Pharmacies (Sav-rite Pharmacies #2 comes in 4th on this list) and the owner was sentenced to six months of jail time and $5,000 fine in 2012. And even in 2012, Strosnider is still reporting the purchase of tens of thousands of opioids to the DEA. FBI said their investigative period focus on transactions in the year 2006 but we can only speculate when the investigation actually began. But we do observe the sharp drop in business of Strosnider from 2008 to 2009 and in that short period of time, they have filed some reports under the second store. Tug Valley’s dose count also rose during that time, possibly taking some sales from Strosnider. It has since closed in 2018 and the location is now operated by CVS. Hurley Drug Company, meanwhile, is still in business.

Now let’s look at the distributor:

Similar to what we saw at the retail level, three distribution companies dominated the market with more than 70% of doses sold. Miami-Luken, a middleman based in Springboro, OH, announced that it’s closing earlier this year. H.D. Smith, which once has the aspiration to break into the big 3 drug wholesaler of Mckesson, Cardinal Health and Amerisource Bergen, has since been acquired by Amerisource Bergen. Mckesson rounded out the top 3, but most of that sales came early in 2006 and 2007. Perhaps they noticed something other distributors didn’t?

By looking at the yearly trend of reporter-buyer pairs, we can see that Mckesson and Miami-Luken are both major suppliers for Strosnider. However, Mckesson’s involvement with Strosnider mostly ended by 2008. Miami-Luken, meanwhile, is also the biggest supplier to Tug Valley. H.D. Smith supplies to both Tug Valley and Hurley Drug Company.

As we can see all of the top 6 products were made by Actavis Pharma, all of them were hydrocodone products with 7.5mg to 10 mg of strength. Actavis The company has acquired Allergan and the combined company has since acquired by Teva. Actavis thus makes up 77% of the opioid dose sold in Mingo County, 75% with those top 6 products. Par Pharmaceutical, which is owned by Endo Pharmaceutical, had 14.8% of the market and again selling mostly 7.5mg and 10mg hydrocodone. SpecGx, part of Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, had 5.6% of the market. Purdue Pharma, the focus of many lawsuits only comes in fourth with less than 1% of the market.

One step of the supply chain that is not shown directly here is the physicians who prescribe the medications. In rural areas like Mingo County, it’s often easy to track who is prescribing as patients usually have no little options to choose from in terms of doctors and pharmacies. In the case of Strosnider, Justice Medical and its physicians have been prosecuted earlier for misuse of DEA registration number. It may be harder to track in urban areas as patients have access to many other pharmacies.

While the surge of opioid prescriptions has now ended, the damage had already done as those patients are now addicted to opioids. With common, legal opioids become less available, they have to turn to even stronger opioids such as heroin and fentenyl, which account for roughly half or around 30,000 opioid deaths in America in 2017. One would wonder whether an anomaly detection system can be built into ARCOS to flag suspicious vendors.

You can find my code at my Github and connect with me on LinkedIn.