Member-only story How Machine Learning Made Me Fall in Love with the WNBA

I had one of those daydreams that come to you from out of nowhere. Before my eyes fell the image of an all-star women’s sports team. The greatest female players across all teams and sports genres playing on the same team. Like Mario Kart except instead of Mario, Princess Peach, and Toad you have Serena Williams, Lisa Leslie, and Katelyn Ohashi all playing on the same platform. I realized that I could make this vision a reality by using data science and machine learning tools to design the best teams and predict what it would look like if they were to play against each other. However, as with all big dreams (and big data), I decided to start with a subset of the women's sports world and work my way up towards acquiring data from other women's sports. So I’m kicking off my mission to make my daydream a reality by analyzing data from the WNBA. Get ready everyone, the ultimate WNBA game is about to begin.

LA Sparks getting hyped before playing.

Step 1: Getting Every Single WNBA Player On the Court (or, data acquisition)

The first thing I did was scrape every single WNBA player’s per-game career stats from Basketball-Reference. In total, I acquired stats for 923 WNBA players. Below is a preview of what the head of my DataFrame looked like. If you want to know what each of the columns in the DataFrame below stands for, check out this glossary. I’ll go ahead and translate one row so that you get an idea of how to interpret this data. Farhiya Abdi of the Los Angeles Sparks has played a total of 52 games and started 5 of those games. On average per game, she played on the court for 9.6 minutes and made 38% of attempted shots, 25% of attempted three-pointers, 43% of attempted two-pointers, and 68% of attempted free throws. Abdi also made an average of 1 rebound, 0.4 assists, 0.2 blocks, 0.4 turnovers, and 1.2 personal fouls. And finally, Abdi scored an average of 2.9 shots per game. Once I’m done clustering all players into ranked teams, I’ll use these per-game stats to simulate a data-driven playoff between…