How to Gain Data Science Experience Before Your First Data Science Job

Photo by Lukas from Pexels

Introduction

The most difficult part of a data science career is undoubtedly the beginning. Landing your first data science role is no small feat. If you don’t have the letters PhD after your name it gets even harder. If you scour the internet for entry level data science jobs, you will most likely feel frustrated with the lofty requirements associated with nearly everything you find. It seems like every job description you look at either says PhD required or minimum 3 years experience with machine learning. This begs the question, “How can you be qualified to work as a data scientist without experience as a data scientist?” Thousands of people take data science courses either online or at a university. These courses are important for building skills, but they won’t be the reason a candidate is selected for a data science job. There is no one way to make your way into data science, but I want to share some of the things I did to gain experience to be prepared to snag my dream job. There are many ways to get experience in data science whether you are a student about to graduate or looking to translation into data science.

Ways To Get Experience

Do Research

Finding an opportunity to collaborate with someone on an academic paper is a great opportunity to get experience in several important areas of data science. The downsides of doing research is that it isn’t usually paid very well and it doesn’t usually involve things like machine learning. Despite this, I highly recommend finding the chance to do research to boost your data science resume.

Why It’s Good Experience

There are two big reasons that doing research should seem attractive. First is the chance to work with data. Because of the nature of research, there is an opportunity to participate in the entire life cycle of data. Some of it, such as data collection, might not be applicable to your future career. Other parts, such as analysis and interpretation are valuable skills. I want to emphasize here the value of being able to interpret data and come…