How to Choose Between Multiple Models

In a previous article we discussed the concepts of underfitting and overfitting, how they can lead to models that don’t match the available data, how to identify each issue, and how to identify models that do fit the data well. These concepts can help you avoid major blunders and generate models that fit the data reasonably accurately; however, there are an incredible number of models that meet that description. This means that the next step, beyond generating a model that fits decently, is identifying which of the possible models fits best.

When determining how well a model fits the data set it’s important to calculate statistical values comparing the model predictions to the data set. This is beyond the scope of this conceptual article, but more information can be found in Data Science from Scratch or in Practical Statistics for Data Scientists. In this article we’ll discuss the process of developing, validating, and testing models.

What are the model development, validation, and testing phases and why are they necessary?

The fundamental issue to be aware of here is that you cannot trust a model that you’ve developed simply because it fits the training data well. This is for a simple reason: You forced the model to fit the training data well. If after creating a model the statistical calculations show that it matches the data well, this means that it’s possible to use mathematical methods to force a model to match the data well. What it doesn’t mean is that the model is capturing the trends that are really occurring, or that the model is able to predict other circumstances. The example of the overfit model in my previous article is a great way to highlight this.

The solution to this is model validation. Validation is the practice of using the model to predict the output in other situations for which you have data, and calculating those same statistical measures of fit on those results. Note that this means you need to divide your dataset into two different data files. The first is a training data set, which you use to generate your models. The second is a validation data set, which you use to check the accuracy of your…