Learning data science is a colossal time and effort suck. You need to understand components of math, computer science, and countless tools that are in constant flux. This is a daunting task, and it can be difficult to stay motivated.

Over time, I have unearthed various ways to efficiently learn the data science skill-set while staying excited about my work. I have condensed this wisdom into 5 “tips”. I hope that you receive the same benefits from the following concepts as I have!

Photo by JESHOOTS.COM on Unsplash

All of these tips have come from various books that I have read. Tip one comes from Atomic Habits by James Clear, tips two and three come from The 4 Disciplines of Execution by Sean Covey, and the last two tips come from Deep Work by Cal Newport. These books have had a tremendous impact on my life and the way that I work, so I highly recommend them.

Tip 1: Create great habits by starting small

Habits are the key to learning any new subject area. Unfortunately, all great habits take repetition. If something is even slightly difficult, we will be less inclined to do it. The wisdom here is to make habits as simple as possible when starting out, then build on them. First, figure out the behavior you want to cultivate, next distill it into its most basic form.

For example, when I was first trying to get into shape, I started doing just a single push-up a day. Hopefully, I could perform this activity even if I was on my death bed. The bar is so low that I would feel awful about myself if I didn’t do it.

I soon found that once I was on the ground doing a push-up, I was inclined to do more (who does just one push up anyway?). I also found that I didn’t feel bad if I only had time to crank out a single one. For me, the two keys to creating sustainable habits were (1) make it easy to get started and (2) don’t feel bad if you do the bare minimum.

After a few weeks, when the push-up was ingrained, I started to build on this habit. I slowly increased the number I did each day. I also added in a pull-up and 2 minutes on the spin bike. After a year of this structure, I have built up to ~45 minutes of stretching and exercise daily that I almost never miss.