Hypothesis testing visualized

In this article, we’ll get an intuitive, visual feel for hypothesis testing. While there are many articles online that explain it in words, there aren’t nearly enough that rely primarily on visuals; which is surprising since the subject lends itself quite well to exposition through pictures and movies.

But before getting too far ahead of ourselves, let’s briefly describe what it even is.

What is

Best to start with an example of a hypothesis test before describing it generally. The first thing we need is a hypothesis. For example, we could hypothesize that the average height of men is greater than the average height of women. In the spirit of ‘proof by contradiction’, we first assume that there is no difference between the average heights of the two genders. This becomes our default, or null hypothesis. If we collect data on the heights of the two groups and find that it is extremely unlikely to have observed this data if the null hypotheses were true (for example, “if the null is true, why do I see such a big difference between the average male and female heights in my samples?”), we can reject it and conclude there is indeed a difference.

For a general hypothesis testing problem, we need the following:

A metric we care about (average height in the example above). Two (or more) groups which are different from each other in some known way (males and females in the example above). A null hypothesis that the metric is the same across our groups, so any difference we observe in our collected data must merely be statistical noise and an alternate hypothesis which says there is indeed some difference.

We can then proceed to collect data for the two groups, estimate the metric of interest for them and see how compatible our data is with our null and alternate hypothesis. The last part is where the theory of hypothesis testing comes in. We’ll literally see how it works in the proceeding sections.

How to reject

Now that we’ve formed our hypothesis and collected our data, how do we use it to reject our null? The general framework is as follows: