I liked the New Math

Figure 1: Egyptian numerals and a Roman counting board (Roman abacus)

“When I think back on all the crap I’ve learned in high school, It’s a wonder I can think at all” - Simon and Garfunkel, Kodachrome

Growing up in the ’60s in California, we were subjected to a lot of educational experiments. We had beanbag chairs in class. We squinted into uncomfortable metal and glass contraptions for “speed reading”. We read snippets of literature on coloured, laminated cards. I remember being proud of reaching SRA level ‘purple’, at the end of the reading crate, but not reading an actual book. The four food groups were replaced with a pyramid, encouraging you to eat lots and lots of carbs. And then there was “New Math.”

Figure 2: Why Johnny can’t read. A tachistoscopic projector and the SRA reading system

New math was an ambitious change in the mathematics curriculum in response to the “Sputnik Shock.” It was a Big Deal in the US, and to a lesser extent, Europe. It was a bold and ambitious plan to turn every child into the next Werner von Braun (assuming Werner von Braun was Alan Turing). It was also a demonstrable failure.

I liked it. Well, not all of it. If you are like me, you were so immersed in it, you can’t reliably distinguish it from old math (e.g., multiplication tables, algebra, geometry, etc.). New Math expanded (and displaced) traditional mathematics curricula with abstract topics, such as set theory, modular arithmetic, algebraic inequalities, number bases, symbolic logic, and Boolean algebra. Whew! Who out there remembers inequalities? (hint: it involves number lines and shading in objects)

It is a bit too easy to be cynical and debate which topic was the most useless, and New Math was quite rightly criticized at the time (see: Why Johnny Can’t Add: The Failure of the New Math [1]).

New Math died in 1973. (The murderers will be revealed later.) After nearly 5 decades, I wanted to understand what it was all about. What follows is a first-hand account of my experience. Many of you will feel my pain. Perhaps, like me, you will have had experienced déjà vu in college or graduate school, where some of these concepts re-appeared and even started to make sense.