What conclusions can we draw?

In this blog, we’ve highlighted inequalities in access and outcomes within IAPT. This is well-established within the field and discussed within the IAPT manual, which outlines evidence-based guidance for effective and efficient delivery of IAPT services. The longitudinal evidence suggests improvements are being made. However, further progress is needed and while we focus on deprivation, the data also shows that people from minority ethnic groups and those identifying as gay, lesbian or bisexual⁶ also have inequalities in access and outcomes with IAPT services.

But the public data we rely on here gives a limited picture on exactly where barriers in the pathway occur and do not allow us to assess possible reasons for variation. Key data missing include:

Severity of symptoms Waiting times Types of treatment offered

It is also important to consider what happens to the 61% of referrals who do not complete treatment, and whether they receive appropriate support through other avenues. Anecdotal evidence suggests clinicians in other services are often unaware of a patient’s engagement with the IAPT programme due to a lack of information-sharing. This might undermine efforts to provide support through other routes.

NHSX has highlighted mental health care as a priority area for digital innovation, and there is significant potential for technology to be used thoughtfully to address some of this variation within IAPT. For example, digital tools could help services move patients along the pathway from referral to treatment completion, or could be used to enable communication between IAPT and other services, allowing clinicians to follow up patients sign-posted to IAPT and ensure they have appropriate support.

In terms of the delivery of treatment, there are already evaluations underway looking at the cost-effectiveness of internet-enabled therapies. But the suitability of these therapies across different patient groups and whether they can address the needs of those currently under-served by mental health care services, also needs to be considered.

Next steps for the Health Foundation

We plan to use pseudo-anonymised individual-level patient data to get a more detailed understanding how patients move through the IAPT programme. Given the health inequalities evident in the publicly available data, we want to build a more granular picture of how waiting times, symptom severity and treatment delivery mode might affect how patients progress through the pathway, and how this varies between different patient groups.

We also have another project underway with other sources of pseudo-anonymised health care data; we’re using GP-records linked to hospital data, via Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) to assess inequalities in access and outcomes for patients with mental health conditions using other NHS services. We are focusing on the impact of additional long-term conditions but will also consider the impact of deprivation as well.

We think this work to build the evidence base of current inequalities is key to ensuring that the push to expand access to mental health care services serves those who most need support.