Photo by Kaleidico on Unsplash

Influencer marketing is not a foreign concept to us anymore. In the US retail business, there are only 33% of the retailers haven’t used or do not intend to use influencer marketing of any kind. However, it is a great way to lift your brand awareness through word-of-mouth advertising. The tricky part is how to find the right person and/or channel to promote your brand.

If you Google for the biggest influencers on social media, you are running against a wall. Instead, you should start with your audience pool and then extend the connections. For example, obtaining your commenters’ information and contacting them about news is a good way to find your influencers. The best way to get those candidates is through web scraping amongst your audience. A lot of businesses don’t have the budget for expensive tools like data integration. However, there are plenty of cheap alternatives out there for you to gather valuable information, and one of them is web scraping software.

What is Web Scraping

Web scraping is a technique to automate the process of data extraction. It involves the process of parsing a website, and collect the snippet of data for your needs. I am going to show you how to use a web scraping tool and make these data available for digital marketing. There is no programming skill required to conduct web scraping. The tool that I used is Octoparse, and I will explain why it yields incredible value for marketing professionals.

Find your “Evangelists”.

According to Joshua, comments are the place where we can leverage to extend our marketing strategy. I am not saying we leave comments and clap hands for your commenters. When the user name of the commenters is clickable, it is possible to connect with them by extracting the profile information. Whenever we have a new piece of content, we reach out to these people. This way we turn commenters into evangelists. Besides, you can go a little more creative by snowballing this method and creating your evangelist’s pool to further your marketing process.

Twitter Evangelists:

Blindly sending messages to beg for tweets won’t work. A great start off is to use your audience pool. The idea is: