Photo by Andy Kelly on Unsplash

Member-only story Introducing Students to Automation & Robotics

Automation has quickly become the talk of the town. Politicians are now running campaigns centering around it. Entire companies are built off of artificial intelligence (AI) and robotic algorithms. Related technology has even begun to seep into the domestic sphere. In a decade or two, the frequency with which we interact with robots and AI may parallel our interaction with humans.

Yet, as education tends to, there is a delay between the content high school students learn and what is practical in the engineering fields. While there are specialized schools that are dedicated to educating students in computer science principles and precocious students form clubs that involve modern fields, most youth do not have access to advanced topics till their late college years. This is under the assumption their college has such advanced fields, many do not.

The concern is that students who attend STEM colleges are underexposed to technical fields. They might be entering a field with limited job growth. Additionally, a unknown field or subject can appear daunting. Without a preliminary introduction by secondary schools, students can simply be discouraged from entering an intimidating field. Teachers are not at fault either. No one can expect a math teacher to become familiar with the mathematics in Robotics.

For the purpose of introducing youth to the field, robotics can be considerably simplified. In college, we learn the most formal methods of developing mathematical models for robotic systems. This is primarily done so that analysis strategies can be generalized and applied to various systems. In doing so, the field requires thorough prerequisite knowledge of linear algebra and differential equations. However, many basic robotic systems can be simplified down to trigonometric principles.

I’d like to demonstrate this with a simple example (If math is scary, feel free to skip past the image). Perhaps an ambitious mathematics teacher can find ways to implement the concept in a lesson plan. In robotic arm modeling there is the concept of forward and inverse kinematics. Forward kinematics is used when we know what the angles between a robot’s joints are. Knowing these angles we can compute…