Photo by Christian Bowen on Unsplash

Healthcare is often spoken of as a field that is on the verge of an AI revolution. Big names in AI such as Google DeepMind, publicise their efforts in healthcare, claiming that “AI is poised to transform medicine.”

But how impactful has AI been so far? Have we really identified areas in healthcare that will benefit from new technology?

At the ACM CHI Conference on ‘Human Factors in Computing Systems’ held in May this year, Carrie J. Cai of Google presented her award-winning work on ‘Human-centered tool for coping with Imperfect Algorithms During Medical Decision-Making, discussing the increasing usage of machine learning algorithms in medical decision making. Her work proposes a novel system enabling doctors to refine and modify the search of pathological images on-the-fly, continuously enhancing the usability of the system.

Retrieving visually similar medical images from past patients (e.g. tissue from biopsies) for reference when making medical decisions with new patients is a promising avenue where the state-of-the-art deep learning visual models can be highly applicable. However, capturing the exact notion of similarity required by the user during a specific diagnostic procedure offers big challenges to existing systems because of a phenomenon known as the intention gap, which refers to the difficulty in capturing the exact intention of the user. We will discuss this in more detail later.

Cai’s research showcases how the refinement tools they developed on their medical image retrieval system increases the diagnostic utility of images and most importantly, increases a user’s trust in the machine learning algorithm for medical decision making. Furthermore, the findings show how the users are able to understand the strengths and weaknesses of the underlying algorithm and disambiguate its errors from their own. Overall the work presented an optimistic view of the future of human-AI collaborative systems in expert decision-making in healthcare.

In this post, we want to look into three main areas namely — (1) the state of content-based image retrieval systems, (2) the role of deep learning in these systems and finally, (3) a discussion on their application and impact in healthcare.