Well, not dead, but dying. Just over one month ago, Facebook’s AI Research team published a paper outlining their results for a superhuman AI capable of consistently outplaying the world’s top poker players. On its own, this is an amazing achievement for AI, but looking past that, it’s set to deliver a devastating blow to the almost $4bn industry of online poker. In the coming months, millions of players worldwide and massive online tech companies will begin to see the effects as these AIs pop-up in online play. A major shift is required in the industry if it is to stay alive.

The paper released by Facebook is a culmination of decades of work into the first AI to beat humans at a game with more than two teams. The AI coined “Pluribus” beat world champion poker players consistently in a format identical to six-player online poker. Not only this, the AI was trained with less than $150 of resources, meaning such a system can be created by almost anyone.

Importantly, the paper doesn’t describe an exact winning formula, rather it outlines the approach used. This means that we won’t be seeing duplicates of Pluribus tomorrow, but we might next month, or next year. Now that it’s shown to be possible and the guiding light is there, various people or groups will work to recreate the AI as closely as possible. All it needs is one success and the AI can be shared instantly around the world.

With the current level of scrutiny, it will be simple for any person or syndicate with such an AI to immediately start to win money in online poker. Initially, this isn’t a problem for online poker companies, but for the humans who play it. As the poker tables become saturated with AI, the chance of any one human winning a game will drop to 0 as will their bank account. This will drive them out of the system at which point it becomes a problem for the online poker companies as their main source of revenue dries up. There may be some ongoing wars between AIs, but the quantity and volume will not be anywhere near the current levels.

To avoid such a hit to the market, stricter security measures may be required. Though it’s true it may be easy to catch such systems if they’re winning every game, a good fraudster — and let’s go with that term here, fraud — will be smart…