Live Prediction of Traffic Accident Risks Using Machine Learning and Google Maps

Here, I describe the creation and deployment of an interactive traffic accident predictor using scikit-learn, Google Maps API, Dark Sky API, Flask and PythonAnywhere. Meraldo Antonio · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 10 min read · Oct 14, 2019 -- 6 Share

Traffic accidents are extremely common. If you live in a sprawling metropolis like I do, chances are that you’ve heard about, witnessed, or even involved in one. Because of their frequency, traffic accidents are a major cause of death globally, cutting short millions of lives per year. Therefore, a system that can predict the occurrence of traffic accidents or accident-prone areas can potentially save lives.

Although difficult, traffic accident prediction is not impossible. Accidents don’t arise in a purely random manner; their occurrence is influenced by a multitude of factors such as drivers’ physical conditions, car types, driving speed, traffic condition, road structure and weather. Studying historical accident records would help us understand the (potentially causative) relationships between these factors and road accidents, which would in turn allow us to build an accident predictor.

Fortunately, several of such accident records are publicly available! For instance, the UK government has published detailed records of traffic accidents in the country dating back to 2002. With this data set, my teammates and I have created and deployed a machine learning model that predicts with high accuracy as to when and where accidents are likely to occur in Greater London.

In this article, I will take you through the process of completing this project. The complete code can be found in my GitHub repository, while the live model can be accessed at this website.

Objective

Before embarking on this project, we set ourselves a clear objective: we wanted to create an interactive traffic accident predictor that would be easily accessible…