Valuations are relatively straightforward yet still involved exercises when similar properties in terms of hedonic variables[i] (also called comparables) transacted in the market close to the valuation date. In the absence of reliable comparable transactions, the possible value of a piece of real estate (be it residential or commercial) needs to be assessed using a valuation method. From back-of-the envelope cap rate models, transparent discounted cash-flow spreadsheets to sophisticated econometric models, any reliable valuation stands to benefit from accurate forecasts of expected levels of cash-flows and discount rates. The buying or selling decision is further influenced by the perceived current state of the real estate cycle but also the projected direction of the cycle.

Predicting rents requires a good understanding of demand and supply forces at work in the space market, construction and how its financed, the evolution of the natural vacancy rate and possible migration flows of both firms and workers, among the more prominent determinants. Forecasting of discount factors involves a thorough understanding of monetary policy (as a determinant of short rates) and of the term-structure of risk premia. If the valuation is done in a portfolio setting, future correlations of the above variables may also be needed in order to assess the diversification benefits of selling or acquiring exposure to a certain real estate sector.

Given the sensitivity of valuations to changes in discount-rates, it’s worth spending a few paragraphs on the determination of short-rates and the risk-free component of the discount rate.

Going deeper down the monetary policy rabbit hole, the level of short-term rates is usually steered by a central bank using a variant of the Taylor rule. This holds for most inflation-targeting central banks around the world. The rule is a formula which links short-rates to output gaps (which measure how far observed output is from a sustainable non-inflationary level) and inflation gaps (which measure how far observed inflation is from an assumed target, usually set at 2%). Positive gaps lead to increases in the interest-rate with negative gaps leading to decreases in the rate.

Conditional on a myriad of other factors, changes in the short end of the curve will propagate along the entire yield curve, not always in homogeneous fashion though. Thus, extending the above also with a model of the term-structure of interest-rates, we may arrive at the risk-free rate expected to be observed at the future transaction date. Risk-premia on top, also quite variable and cyclical, and we finally have our discount rates at different future points in time.

This brief slalom points to the data hungry but also the modelling intensive nature of real estate valuation. The longer the required holding period for an asset, the further out one needs to forecast the above-mentioned variable. The further out we look, the murkier the estimates and thus less reliable the valuation.