Photo by Jp Valery on Unsplash

In the 45th presidency, there is much talk about what constitutes presidential language. But it wasn’t always “fake news,” “haters and losers,” and “covfefe.” There is a long legacy of presidential language in the US, and machine learning can help us gain new insights into this very historical topic.

In the past month or so, I have been working on a project with the aim of using data science to learn about presidential language. In my exploration so far, I have compared and tracked word usage, created clusters of presidents, classified speech excerpts by president, and generated missing words based on context. In this post, I want to share my findings from clustering presidents by word choice.

My complete dataset includes all official speeches from all 44 US presidents. In total, there were almost 3.5 million words from 945 speeches across 223 years. (Data obtained from The Grammar Lab’s Corpus of Presidential Speeches and the Presidential Speeches website by the Miller Center at UVA.)

I organized a dataframe in which there were 44 rows, each row containing a string of all the words in all speeches by each president. Since clustering is an unsupervised learning method, I stripped the data of labels. From this point, I applied CountVectorizer to the data, scaled it, and then fed it into a k-means clustering model. For the clustering model, I chose k=5 clusters, which yielded the best silhouette score.

The results were exciting! The model clustered the presidents chronologically. This finding is remarkable because the model’s only inputs were the words used in each president’s speeches — not any information about dates.

In the cluster timeline, each cluster, consisting of presidents whose word choices most closely relate to one another, is represented by a different color. On the left, the purple cluster contains the founding fathers, and on the right, the blue cluster contains the modern-day presidents. The green cluster runs roughly from WWI to WWII, and the orange cluster contains presidents from WWII until a few decades ago. The red cluster spans the longest time period, over 100 years.

Throughout time, the clusters run almost entirely uninterrupted — with one major exception: Lincoln. As his green square stands out in a sea of red, the clustering model asserts that Lincoln’s word choices make him stand out from other presidents of his era.

Lincoln delivered some of America’s most memorable speeches, and even machine learning agrees that Lincoln was ahead of his time!

For more insights on machine learning and presidential language, visit my GitHub page: