Before building any machine learning model, it is important to sit down carefully and plan what you want your model to accomplish. Before delving into writing code, it is important that you understand the problem to be solved, the nature of the dataset, the type of model to build, how the model will be trained, tested, and evaluated.

This article will discuss 10 important questions to consider before building a machine learning model.

(1) What are the predictor variables?

In academic training programs, we often work with very simple datasets and the problem to be solved is well defined. For instance, a homework problem could provide you with some clean dataset and it might ask you to use certain set of features as your predictor features, and one feature as your target. The problem can go even further to tell you what kind of model to build. In a real life data science task, you don’t know what the predictors variables are. Depending on the organization you are working for, you may have to work with a team of engineers (industrial dataset), doctors (healthcare dataset), etc, in order to figure out what the target variable is. For example maybe an industrial system has sensors that generated data in real time, in this case, as a data scientist, you may not have technical knowledge about the system in question. So you have to work with engineers and technicians for them to guide you to decide what features are of interest and what are the predictor variables and the target variable. Depending on the type and complexity of the problem, there might be hundreds or thousand of features in your dataset. So you will have to decide which of these are important for model building.

(2) What is the target variable? Is my target variable discrete or continuous?

Your target variable is the feature that your model is going to be trained to predict. The target variable could be continuous (e.g. predicting the price of a house in a city based on features such as number of rooms, age, square footage, zip code, number of school districts,number of employers, etc.) or discrete (predicting iris species — Iris setosa, Iris virginica and Iris versicolor…