Make Data Acquisition Easy with AWS & Lambda (Python) in 12 Steps

This article will serve as a brief introduction to AWS Lambda and building a fully serverless data pipeline. This article is written for people with at least basic (and I mean basic) understanding of Python, but you can be brand new to AWS. We will create an AWS account and then have a Lambda function pull data from Craigslist and store it in a S3 bucket for us automatically, daily.

About Me: Data scientist and enthusiast who is continuously trying to learn new technologies that make my life easier. Like many in the data science community I am self taught and not from a statistics or CS background. In a past life I was a mechanical engineer, but that feels like eons ago. Over the years I have gotten pretty good with Python and AWS (I have a few of the certifications), and because I’ve always learned so much from others I thought it was my turn to contribute to the community. Feel free to connect with me on LinkedIn or check out my Github profile if you find this article useful.

What Is Lambda

Often I run into this scenario of “I wrote this Python function and need it to run every day”. You could set up a Cron on your machine, but what if your computer is off? The other option is to turn to the cloud. The old way to do this with AWS was to spin up an EC2 instance, SSH into it, give it your function or maybe a docker image, set up a Cron job there, and so forth. That isn’t too bad, but it is a bit of a pain. Also, if I just need something to run daily do I really need a EC2 instance running all day? Enter Lambda (yes I know you could also use Batch for this, but this is a Lambda tutorial).

AWS has a ton of services, but perhaps my favorite is AWS Lambda. Basically it lets you focus on writing code and not dealing with annoying things like VPCs, EC2 instances, MySQL databases, etc. Just write some Python, give that code to Lambda, and it will execute that code in the Cloud. Even better, you can trigger that code in a variety of ways: every minute, once a day, when you put something into an S3 bucket, etc. Lambda is totally awesome (and cheap) and has quickly become my most used AWS service.