Mall Customers Segmentation — Using Machine Learning

Bringing Data Science, Machine Learning and Business together for-profit enhancement of malls or shopping complexes Shubhankar Rawat · Follow 5 min read · May 20, 2019 -- 2 Listen Share

The use of machine learning can be seen almost everywhere around us, be it Facebook recognizing you or your friends, or YouTube recommending you a video or two based on your history — Machine Learning is everywhere!

However, the ‘magic’ of machine learning is not just limited to only these areas.

Machine Learning is broadly categorized as Supervised and Unsupervised Learning.

Supervised Learning is one in which we teach the machine by providing both independent and dependent variables, for example, Classifying or predicting values.

Unsupervised Learning mainly deals with identifying the structure or pattern of the data. In this type of algorithms, we do not have labeled data(or the dependent variable is absent), for example, clustering data, recommendation systems, etc.

Unsupervised Learning provides amazing results as one can deduce many hidden relations between different attributes or features.

In this article, I will be discussing a specific problem based on clustering techniques(Unsupervised Learning). However, my main aim in this article is to discuss the opulent use of machine learning in business and profit enhancement.

The Problem

Malls or shopping complexes are often indulged in the race to increase their customers and hence making huge profits. To achieve this task machine learning is being applied by many stores already.

It is amazing to realize the fact that how machine learning can aid in such ambitions. The shopping complexes make use of their customers’ data and develop ML models to target the right ones. This not only increases sales but also makes the complexes efficient.

Enough talk, let’s get in the action.

You can find the code in my GitHub repository here

The Data

Dataset of the mall customers

Here we have the following features :

1. CustomerID: It is the unique ID given to a customer

2. Gender: Gender of the customer

3. Age: The age of the customer

4. Annual Income(k$): It is the annual income of the customer

5. Spending Score: It is the score(out of 100) given to a customer by the mall authorities, based on the money spent and the behavior of the customer.

Data Preprocessing

Checking the null values :

We have zero null values in any column. Sounds Good!

We see that we have only one categorical feature: Gender, we will one hot encode this feature.

Data after one-hot encoding :

Now the data preprocessing has been done and now let us move on to making the clustering model.

I will use the K-Means Clustering algorithm to cluster the data.

To implement K-Means clustering, we need to look at the Elbow Method.

The Elbow method is a method of interpretation and validation of consistency within-cluster analysis designed to help to find the appropriate number of clusters in a dataset.

The following figure demonstrates the elbow method :

It is clear from the figure that we should take the number of clusters equal to 5, as the slope of the curve is not steep enough after it.

Finally, let us plot the clusters :