A common scenario facing governmental and non-governmental organizations is how to deploy finite resources to maximum impact. Often these organizations must make decisions without full information transparency. This essay demonstrates how data analysis and modeling can be used to help organizations in this scenario maximize their resources.

To bring the concepts to life, we will use the following scenario:

Large portions of Tanzania’s population rely upon local water pumps as their primary source of clean water. Unfortunately, these pumps sometimes break — limiting access to clean water until the pump is fixed. Tanzania’s Department of Water & Agriculture is responsible for maintaining this network of thousands of water pumps; however, the department has little ability to actively track the status of any individual water pump. The department head has asked us to help her prioritize which wells should be fixed in the next year. She estimates her department can deploy, at most, five workers per day, who can each visit one site per day.

The good news is that the department has been recording data about each water pump they have their visited throughout the country since 2002 (including whether the pump was functional or not). This data has allowed us to build a model which can be used to predict if a water pump is functional, functional but in need of maintenance, or is not functional. With this model we can begin to help the department prioritize maintenance trips in the future. To that end, we have been provided with data describing ~14K water pump locations within which the department wants us to predict maintenance needs.¹

Part 1: Building a Predictive Model

An initial baseline model, utilizing a RandomForest estimator, correctly classified water pumps as functional/in need of repair/non-functional approximately 70% of the time when making predictions with data that was not used to build the model. After some further work, the model’s accuracy increased to ~80% (If you are interested in the model building process, all of the code behind the model is available on Github). Note, we could explore further improvements to our model; however, 80% accuracy will be sufficient for solving this problem (more on that later).

As shown below, our model has used the data provided by the department to make the following predictions:

At this point we can report back to the department that our model has identified 4,774 water pumps that are likely in need of servicing and pat ourselves on the back for a job well done. Right? We could do that, but the department may not be very happy….

As noted above, the department can only fix 5 wells per day, assuming 252 working days (US schedule), the department can only fix 1,260 water pumps in the next year. This means we need to prioritize which pumps to service.

Part 2: Prioritizing Our Predictions

Given that we cannot service all of the water pumps our model is predicting are in need of service, we should prioritize servicing the pumps that our model is most confident are actually broken. Doing so is relatively trivial, we simply look at the ‘non functional’ probability our model assigned to each water pump represented in the dataset. Ranking these probabilities allows us to identify the 1,260 water pumps we are most confident are broken.

This approach shifts our focus from maximizing our model’s overall accuracy score to a metric known as precision at k. Precision at k is why, our model was ‘good enough’ with 80% accuracy. Given our limited resources, we really care only about the predictions our model makes for the water pumps we have capacity to repair. Thus, our accuracy measured at k, in this case k=1,260, is substantially higher than our overall accuracy score. Effort invested in increasing the model’s accuracy beyond 80% would have been misplaced.

With our predictions prioritized, we can now confidently present our recommendations to the department. To do so, we likely should visualize our prioritized predictions as follows:

Luckily, as we are about to send our final presentation to the printer, a thought crept into our head … ‘I wouldn’t want to be the maintenance team driving all over the country to visit these dispersed sites. Maybe there are other factors to take into account’….

Part 3: Maximizing Impact

While accuracy is important, there are a number of other factors that we likely want to take into account when prioritizing which water pumps to service. For example, it may make sense to consider the following:

Population: How many people are impacted by the water pump?

How many people are impacted by the water pump? Distance: How close to other non functioning water pumps is this one?

By combining these metrics with the predicted probability that a well is non functional, we can derive an ‘impact score’ for each water pump. The formula to derive our impact score could look something like the following: