Mitigation of Climate Change with Machine Learning

My current focus is AI safety, and I thus regard addressing the climate crisis to be of the highest priority in this context — the highest risk so to speak. At the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) in June there was a clear focus on climate change on one of the conference day the 14th of June. All the videos and presentations from the conference can be accessed online. I will however speak of one post made the 10th of June in connection to this conference on climatechange.ai (this page is useful!). I will take a brief look at some segments of the paper posted on arXiv called Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning.

The paper is 53 pages long so I will only provide a glimpse into what is discussed. The paper focuses on different areas of which I will cover three areas in relation to mitigation, simply summarising a few points to help you understand whether it would be valuable for you to dive deeper into the paper itself. The three areas I will outline is:

Opportunities in energy Opportunities in transportation Opportunities in the construction industry

A call for collaboration

What I perhaps like the most about this paper is that it is framed immiediately as a call for collaboration. The authors emphasise that machine learning is not a ‘silver bullet’. The applications they highlight are impactful, but they simultaneously argue no one solution will “fix” climate change. “…technology alone is not enough — technologies that would reduce climate change have been available for years, but have largely not been adopted at scale by society.”

Authors of the paper are: David Rolnick, Priya L. Donti , Lynn H. Kaack , Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran, Andrew Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic-Dupont, Natasha Jaques, Anna Waldman-Brown, Alexandra Luccioni, Tegan Maharaj, Evan D. Sherwin, S. Karthik Mukkavilli, Konrad Kording, Carla Gomes, Andrew Ng, Demis Hassabis, John C. Platt, Felix Creutzig, Jennifer Chayes, and Yoshua Bengio.

Mitigation and Adaption

The paper starts by outlining a few known facts within the area of climate change with rising emissions that show no trend of decreasing. Then it rolls into the idea of mitigation (reducing emissions) and adaptation (preparing for unavoidable consequences). These diverse problems can be seen as an opportunity to have an impact.

Mitigation is the focus of this short article.

Who is this paper for?

Shortly after the introduction they outline this paper as aimed towards these different groups:

Researchers and engineers: encouraging solutions and through the identification by the work done in the paper for areas requiring conceptual innovation. Entrepreneurs and investors: several business opportunities are outline. Among them are; the fine-grained solar forecasts for power companies; tools for helping reduce personal energy consumption; and predictions for the financial impacts of climate change. Corporate leaders: business cases are identified optimising supply chains to reduce waste and software/hardware tools for precision agriculture. Local and national governments: discussions on how to gather data for decision-making, and guide plans for future development. They highlight intelligent transportation systems ; techniques for automatically assessing the energy consumption of buildings in cities; and tools for improving disaster management.

The paper is easily structured and breaks down the different categories with a set of tags such as high leverage, long-term and high risk. As such it would be helpful for you if you find an area you want to explore further and dive into that specific area of the paper. You will be happy to see that it is well structured and gives an easily accessible overview of topics.

Mitigation of climate change

Electricity systems is the first area listed where machine learning techniques could make a difference. “AI has been called the new electricity, due to its potential to transform entire industries. Interestingly, electricity itself is one of the industries that AI is poised to transform.”

1. Opportunities in Energy

They outline key actions society must undertake in the energy sector:

Rapidly transition to low-carbon electricity sources (such as solar, wind, hydro, and nuclear) and phase out carbon-emitting sources (such as coal, natural gas, and other fossil fuels).

(such as solar, wind, hydro, and nuclear) and phase out carbon-emitting sources (such as coal, natural gas, and other fossil fuels). Reduce emissions from existing carbon-emitting power plants , since the transition to low-carbon fuels will not happen overnight.

, since the transition to low-carbon fuels will not happen overnight. Implement these changes across all countries and contexts, as electricity systems are everywhere

These can be done and are further outline in: (1) Generation and demand forecasting; (2) improving scheduling and demand; (3) accelerated science for materials; (4) nuclear fission and fusion; (5) nuclear power plants; (6) reducing life-cycle fossil fuels emissions; (7) reducing system waste; (8) modelling emissions; (9) improving electricity access; (10) low-data settings; (11)

2. Opportunities within Transportation

After running through improvements in energy they move to transportation working in the same fashion stating what needs to be done:

Decreasing transportation activity . At present, more than two thirds of transportation emissions are from road travel, , but air travel has the highest emission intensity and is responsible for an increasingly large share.

. At present, more than two thirds of transportation emissions are from road travel, , but air travel has the highest emission intensity and is responsible for an increasingly large share. Increasing vehicle efficiency . ML can improve vehicle engineering, enable intelligent infrastructure, and provide policy-relevant information

. ML can improve vehicle engineering, enable intelligent infrastructure, and provide policy-relevant information Reducing the carbon impact of fuel . ML that is concerned with improving these tasks, for example by providing better demand forecasts, can make transportation more efficient. Typically, ML solutions are most effective in tandem with strong public policies.

. ML that is concerned with improving these tasks, for example by providing better demand forecasts, can make transportation more efficient. Typically, ML solutions are most effective in tandem with strong public policies. Shifting to lower-carbon options, like rail. Electrified roads and railways, and can have very low GHG emissions — assuming, of course, that the electricity is generated with mostly low-carbon generators.

Again this can be explored in: (1) understanding transportation data; (2) modelling demand; (3) shared mobility; (4) freight routing and consolidation; (5) designing for efficiency; (6) autonomous vehicles; (7) electric vehicles; (8) alternative fuels; (9) passenger preferences; and (10) improving low-carbon options.

3. Opportunities in the Construction Industry

The energy consumed in buildings is responsible for a quarter of global energy-related emissions, however in the paper they claim a combination of easy-to-implement fixes and state-of-the-art solutions could reduce emissions for existing buildings by 90% (optimistic!). It is possible today for buildings to consume almost no energy. In this section they are not as clear at outlining what needs to be done, however I will try to compress it based on the structure. Its main focus seems on two aspects:

Optimizing buildings . In designing new buildings and improving existing ones, there are numerous technologies that can reduce both costs and GHG emissions. ML can accelerate these solutions by (i) modeling data on energy consumption and (ii) optimizing energy use (in smart buildings).

. In designing new buildings and improving existing ones, there are numerous technologies that can reduce both costs and GHG emissions. ML can accelerate these solutions by (i) modeling data on energy consumption and (ii) optimizing energy use (in smart buildings). Urban planning . District-level data is often not available. ML can help in obtaining it in two ways: Where energy-use data on individual buildings exists, ML can be used to derive higher-level patterns. Where data on energy use and infrastructure is completely lacking, ML can infer it.

. District-level data is often not available. ML can help in obtaining it in two ways: Where energy-use data on individual buildings exists, ML can be used to derive higher-level patterns. Where data on energy use and infrastructure is completely lacking, ML can infer it. Data in city operations. Recently, data and ML have become more common for improving efficiency in such areas, giving rise to the notion of smart city. While the phrase smart city encompasses a wide array of technologies, here we discuss only applications that are relevant reducing GHG emissions.

Further subsections include: (1) energy use models; (2) smart buildings; (3) district-level energy use; (4) gathering infrastructure data; (5) data for smart cities; and (6) low-emission infrastructure.

Will You Read the Paper?

As I mentioned in the introduction I am writing up some notes on this to encourage you to dive deeper into the paper. This text is of course not comprehensive and only meant to outline a few of the issues. In the conclusion they say the following:

“Machine learning, like all technology, does not always make the world a better place — but it can. In the fight against climate change, we have seen that ML has significant contributions to offer across domain areas […] we emphasize that ML is only one part of the solution; it is a tool that enables other tools across fields. Addressing the problems of climate change has the potential to both benefit society and present new directions for the field of machine learning. The solutions we envision require dialogue with fields outside and within computer science, which will lead not only to novel application domains but also to new methodological insights applicable across ML.” [bold added]

As such in the spirit of their conclusion I can draw my following reflections:

Make a difference with ML Your effort in ML is only part of the solution Collaborate with other fields

The report makes another set of recommendations in their conclusion which I will outline here too:

Learn . Identify how your skills may be useful — we hope this paper provides a starting point.

. Identify how your skills may be useful — we hope this paper provides a starting point. Collaborate . Find collaborators, who may be researchers, entrepreneurs, established companies, or policy-makers. Remember that for every domain we have discussed here, there are experts in that area who understand its opportunities and pitfalls, even if they do not necessarily understand ML.

. Find collaborators, who may be researchers, entrepreneurs, established companies, or policy-makers. Remember that for every domain we have discussed here, there are experts in that area who understand its opportunities and pitfalls, even if they do not necessarily understand ML. Listen . Listen to what your collaborators say is needed, and gather input more broadly as well to make sure your work will have the desired impact. Groundbreaking technologies have an impact, but so do well-constructed solutions to mundane problems.

. Listen to what your collaborators say is needed, and gather input more broadly as well to make sure your work will have the desired impact. Groundbreaking technologies have an impact, but so do well-constructed solutions to mundane problems. Deploy. Ensure that your work is deployed where its impact can be realized. We call upon the machine learning community to use its skills as part of the global effort against climate change.

Albeit brief I certainly hope this article was helpful in some way shape or form.