My product is smarter than you! Can you truly like it?

Trust me, I’m a robot!

In my previous story, what is AI for product managers, I discussed precision and recall as two main KPIs you need to decide which one to optimize your AI model. I discussed the impact and benefits of each and how it affects your product and the experience of your customers.

In this post I would like to discuss another challenge faced by product managers when building AI-based products.

Control. We all like to have control, yes we are control freaks. We like to have control of our life, control of our resources, control of our time, control of our health… you get the idea. No one really likes surprises, and by surprises I mean unwanted surprises. $20 million dollars lottery ticket is still a welcome surprise (for most of us).

Photo by Lane Smith on Unsplash

Products, and especially good products, provide value by solving a problem or creating an opportunity. They are perceived good because they also give you the control you are looking for. For example, time management products try to give you control of your time, project management products give you control of your resources and the project progress (and thus help you achieve your goals and meet your deadlines). Giving your 8 years old child a smartphone provide you control of their whereabouts.

I’m losing control!

Building an AI-based product, a predictive model, can be very promising, but usually the algorithm behind it is a black box. It takes huge amount of data, tries to find correlations and similar behavior to predict what is going to happen next. However, the model usually gives you only the end result, the prediction. So no matter how accurate it is, and sometimes even “too” accurate, the users that consume the result of it, don’t understand the rational and what led to that decision. The result may often be that they don’t trust it. Even if they do trust the results, they have a problem to relate to it. From my experience, it is because the control has been taken away from them.

Machines do become smarter and smarter. They analyze text and speech, they can respond to you, they can make decisions and…