My top 10 Python packages for data science

After making a leap from SAS to Python over 4 years ago, I never looked back. Zeming Yu · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 4 min read · Mar 25, 2019 -- 2 Share

Over the last 4 years, I have transitioned from using SAS exclusively for all data processing and statistical modeling tasks to using Python for these tasks. One barrier I had to overcome was to keep discovering and learning to use all the great packages put together by the open-source community.

There are a lot of benefits of adopting these open source packages, including:

Everything is free Most likely they are constantly being updated and improved There’s a large community offering support to each other on websites like Stack Overflow

It does take some time to get familiar with these packages. However, if you are the kind of person who’s curious/ excited about learning new things, you’ll actually enjoy the process.

Today I’m sharing my top 10 Python packages for data science, grouped by tasks. Hopefully, you find it useful!

Data processing

pandas

Developed by Wes McKinney more than a decade ago, this package offers powerful data processing capabilities. For people with a SAS background, it is a bit like SAS data steps. You can do sorting, merging, filtering, etc. The key difference is in pandas, you call a function to perform these tasks.

By the way, I was really amazed to know that Wes McKinney was able to develop pandas after only a few years of Python experience. Some people are just really gifted!

His book Python for Data Analysis is highly recommended if you are just starting out your Python data science journey.

numpy

Pandas builds on top of this package numpy. So when you will often rely on this package for basic data manipulations. For example, when you need to create a new column based on the age of the customer, you need to do something like:

df['isRetired'] = np.where(df['age']>=65, 'yes', 'no')

qgrid

An amazing package that allows you to sort, filter, and edit DataFrames in Jupyter Notebooks.