Community Clustering using Louvain Modularity

With the network built, algorithms can be used to cluster the network in order to identify locations which form communities based on the ride-share data. While a native of Chicago might be able to answer this question, I was curious to see how quickly I could learn about how transportation worked in a city I’d never been in with just ride-share data found publicly on the internet.

The method chosen comes from a paper called “Fast Unfolding of Communities in Large Networks.”¹ According to this paper, the method tries to maximize the number of links between nodes in each community, compared to nodes outside of their community. It does this by first randomly assigning each node to a community, then moves each node to a new community until modularity is maximized. This creates communities that are more closely linked within itself than with nodes which belong to other communities. Luckily for me, this method comes built in with Networkx.

The clustering seen here intuitively made sense. There are clear distinctions between the Loop and surrounding nodes, downtown and uptown Chicago. It was interesting to see that both airports were clustered along with the high volume nodes in the Loop. I can assume that’s because many travelers are heading to downtown hotels from these airports.

What did I learn?

Data collected by cities can be a powerful tool in the right hands. Without ever stepping foot into Chicago, I was able to see how ride-sharing ties certain communities together, as well as where most of the rides were occurring. It would be interesting to see if the results of the community clustering changes over time of day or year! One thing to note would be how changes to ride-share policy would have different effects for each part of the city. While some people have been talking about the benefits of ride-sharing as a supplement to aging public transportation infrastructure, the network clusters here clearly show that some communities experience minimal benefit from ride-sharing.

The next thing that I want to do is apply time series forecasting methods to each of these community clusters in order to see how well I could predict the volume of rides. Hopefully other cities are learning from Chicago and are investing in their own open data platforms in order informed, data-backed decisions on urban planning and policy development.

The full code for all of my analysis to date using this data-set can be found on my github.