Nvidia’s New Data Science Workstation — a Review and Benchmark

I write a newsletter for learners called Mighty Knowledge. Each new issue contains links and key lessons from the very best content including quotes, books, articles, podcasts, and videos. Each and every one is picked out specifically for learning how to live a wiser, happier, and fuller life. Sign up for it here.

The past several years have seen a massive surge in interest for Data Science, so much so that many companies are reorienting their business strategy and branding themselves as “data driven”.

There’s a good reason for this and it’s no secret: more data gives us bigger opportunities to extract insights and create bigger business value.

Big datasets require big computing power. You’ll need a good CPU, ideally with many cores like a Xeon type processor. Lots of RAM is a definite requirement — it’s not uncommon to see Data Scientists purchasing 64 or even 128GB of RAM, and sometimes that’s not even enough!

The Nvidia Quadro RTX 8000 GPU has 48GB of VRAM

On top of that, after becoming very popular in Deep Learning, GPUs are now making their way into Data Science. GPUs can now also be used to accelerate the processing and visualization of large dataframes (similar to Pandas). The always popular XGBoost library comes with its own built-in GPU acceleration.

Nvidia has recently released their Data Science Workstation, a PC that puts together all the Data Science hardware and software into one nice package. The workstation is a total powerhouse machine, packed with all the computing power — and software — that’s great for plowing through data.

I recently had the chance to test and review the Data Science Workstation, which we’ll go through in this article.

The specs

The workstation I tested was built by Boxx. It comes with all the hardware pre-built and the software pre-installed, plus some extra cabling just in case. Having the machine pre-built was great since it’s something that might take a good few hours. Here are the main hardware specs: