On how I acknowledge human based bias and how to handle it

In the world of data science, we define bias as the phenomenon in which a system overgeneralize from its data and learn the wrong thing. When this happens, the usual first action we take is to point fingers at the data or training process, followed by saying “this data is bad” or “I should further tune my hyperparameters.” Sure, this could be part of the problem. However, before spending more time and processing power, I’d like to invite you to stop, take a step back, and think about how the data we are using came to be, and more importantly, let us reason about how we are interpreting it.

Unlike machines and smart learners, we humans, suffer from bias, a bias that could have been introduced for numerous reasons, such as by moments we have previously experienced or concepts and definitions that are already part of who we are. Unfortunately, this bias could influence the way we handle, and interpret data, creating a problem when we, inadvertently, transfer those ideas and assumptions into our dataset, and consequently to our machine learning models and their outcome. Examples of these consequences are often mentioned in the media (generally with headers that include an undesirable dose of fearmongering) such as the case of the famous ‘sexist’ recruitment model from Amazon that preferred male prospect candidates over female ones.

In this article, I discuss three sources of bias, the confirmation bias, availability heuristic, and sample bias, and write about how I have acknowledged their presence and effect, alongside several techniques I apply to deal with them.

Since 2016 I have been working on the Antispam team of a dating and social platform, where my goal is to build solutions to detect spammers and avoid the proliferation of them. In the beginning of my career at the company, I had entirely no knowledge about our users (as expected); I did not fully know our demographics, nor the behavioral pattern of them. What I want to say is that from a simple glimpse, I could not tell whether a user was a spammer or not; anybody could be one! Then, with each passing day, you start to experience and learn…