The modern world provides constant stimulations and distractions. Our smartphones keep us connected, and we are tempted to multitask all the time, even while driving!

This is a serious problem that poses a big threat to road safety and drivers’ lives. Risk mitigation is required. But how? This was the challenge our team faced on Hack-Zurich.

Picture credit: Dafna Mordechai

Millennials on the Move — Challenge Accepted!

Last September I participated in HackZurich, Europe’s largest Hackathon. Hundreds of engineers from all around the world gathered for 40 hours of coding, pizza, and no sleep.

The Hackathon offered 16 different coding challenges. Our team, “Safety Matters”, chose to tackle the “Millennials on the move” challenge, provided by Esri and Zurich Insurance. The mission was clear — use geospatial data to save lives on the roads.

In this article, I will describe our data-driven solution, that led us to win the challenge.

Data Data Data

We were provided with the Brightbox Millennials Dataset, that contains information about trips of over 1,000 millennials drivers. The information was gathered using dedicated hardware that was installed in the car and sampled data every few seconds.

Here are the main features: trip-ID, timestamp, city, country, vehicle year, age, longitude, latitude, mileage, speed, engine RPM.

Our Solution — Comprehensive Risk Mitigation

We aimed to give comprehensive risk mitigation; On the one hand, we wanted to deal with the infrastructure factor and alert authorities about dangerous areas. On the other hand, we wanted to address the human factor and generate personalized alerts in real time to help the drivers whenever they may be at risk.

Classifying Dangerous Areas

The first task was to identify dangerous areas, but how can we define a dangerous area? The intuition is that we can learn from the behavior of drivers about the area’s risk level. We can look for dangerous or unusual drivers behavior, and if we identify a specific area with a high frequency of dangerous behaviors, we can classify this area as risky. To verify our intuition, the result must be validated.

So the process is: defining a dangerous behavior, scanning for hazardous areas, and validating the results.

From Information to Knowledge

The features we decided to focus on were timestamp, longitude, latitude, and speed. In the picture below, each dot is a data sample. The color represents the speed, and the dot is located according to the sampled longitude and latitude. Although it is a great visualization of the trip, without further processing, the data is somewhat trivial.

The speed displayed on Esri’s GIS mapping software, for a single driver in a single trip and at a specific area.

Since raw data can’t tell us much about drivers behavior, we used our knowledge as drivers to define what dangerous behavior is. We examined two sequential data samples - if the speed dropped by 75% or more, this location is marked as an alarm. In the picture below, you can see an “alarm set” of a single driver, displayed on Esri’s GIS mapping software.

An alarm-set of a single driver displayed on Esri’s GIS mapping software.

From Knowledge to Wisdom

Now when we have the alarms mapped, the next step is to cluster the alarms. If a cluster crosses a threshold, the area is classified as dangerous.

The figure below shows a cluster of alarms that happened to be on a junction. Each dot on the map is an alarm, and the color distinguishes the drivers. You can see that some drivers have two alarms at this location, not necessarily from the same trip.

Intuition is Good, Validation is Better!

We wanted to validate our solution, so we used another data set, the car accidents data from 2016. We indeed found a good correlation between the areas that our process identified as risky and areas with records of accidents. Due to lack of time, this was done manually and not automatically.

Dangerous areas identification process.

Using this methodology, a data scientist can test different alarm-criteria, or even combine a few of them and then test different thresholds for alarm clustering to produce better results.

Taking Action — a Live Demo

Giving Value to the Authorities

The area classification process that was described above is based on the assumption that most of the drivers, on most of the rides, drive responsibly, and in a manner that is suited to the road. Sudden breaks, under this assumption, are probably caused due to something that is related to the conditions on the road, or to the driver’s field of vision, etc.

The authorities can get a list of the areas that are classified as risky, and examine the road — is there anything that can be done to reduce the risk for accidents? Do traffic laws fit the field of view? Are the signs on the road clean and visible?

Giving Value to the Drivers

The end goal, from the drivers’ point of view, is to create an alert system, that will give audio notifications to the driver in real time, based on the level of risk of the area.

Another way of using the classification process is to run it just on the data of a specific driver, resulting in a set of personalized risky areas, that are based on the driver’s driving pattern.

At this point, when we have both types of hazardous areas, general risky areas, and personalized risky areas, we can use them to assign a safety level for every zone and give an audio “risky zone” alert before entering the area. Alerts may be even more well adjusted by taking into consideration other variables such as the car speed, the weather, the time of the day, etc.

Hopefully, regularly using a system that is tailor-made to the driver and the road, can increase awareness of the ever-changing conditions of the road and help drivers adopt more responsible driving habits.

Although the demo seems like a mobile application, our vision was to embed this solution in the car. We didn’t want to define a solution that is, by itself, another cause of distraction.

Can We Do More with the Data? YES, WE CAN!

What else can be done with the data to mitigate risk at the dangerous zones?

The fact that the speed is sampled directly from the car, and not deduced from the coordinates and timestamps, is very powerful. This information allows us to create a heatmap of the average speed on the roads of a risky zone.

In the figure below, you can see such heatmap, based only on the millennials data set, without any other mapping tools. You can see how accurate the roads are depicted in comparison to a real map. This further analysis of the road can be helpful for the drivers and for the authorities.

From the authorities’ point of view, with this type of tool, traffic regulation can be done more empirically, relying on data, and leading to optimized traffic laws. For example, the road traffic authorities can adjust the limited speed according to the actual driving patterns of the area, rather than relying on a heuristic for setting the speed limit.

Examine the junction in the figure below: when entering the intersection from the south, the colors on the heatmap changes from yellow to red. i.e., the average speed drops from ~80 Km/h to less than~40 Km/h.

Limiting the speed before the junction, or adding a sign indicating that there is a junction coming up head, are two possible solutions that will allow the drivers to slow down safely, and prevent sudden breaks.

Heatmap of the average speed at a specific junction.

From the drivers’ point of view, this information can be integrated into the alert system that was described above, and give another type of alerts. The current speed of the car can be compared in real time to the heatmap, and if the difference between the average speed and the current one cross a threshold, the driver will be given an audio “high speed” alert. This alert will signal a potential danger before the driver can even sense a threat and hopefully will prevent accidents.

Note that speed thresholds are variables that can be changed dynamically according to various factors such as the current weather, temporary constructions on the road, or other personal factors such as the driver’s age, driver’s driving experience, or driver’s familiarity with the road (according to the driving history records).

I Got Curious…

The junction near Witcham that is seen in the figures and the maps of this article was chosen randomly when we created our hackathon pitch presentation. It wasn’t a junction with a significant alarm cluster. Still, when writing this blog-post, I got curious to see the actual road.

An image of the junction, taken from Google Maps.

Examining the junction on Google-Maps shows an open road that ends with a three-way junction. The sign which restricts the speed limit is right at the intersection itself. This may be a reason for hitting the breaks at the point where the junction and the sign are visible and not entering the intersection more slowly.

Matters Accomplished

Our solution presents a methodological way of using simple and accessible data such as the car GPS coordinates and speed to classify and analyze danger zones. The process yields valuable information to the authorities, that can use it to improve the roads infrastructures and optimize the traffic laws. It is also helpful for the drivers since they can get personalized audio alerts in real time based on this information. All in all, this solution is a holistic approach to preventing potential accidents and improving driving skills.

A short discussion

It is important to note that the data set is lacking information about the Driver-ID. When a few different drivers are using the same car, a specific trip cannot be attributed to one rather than another. Technically, a trip is associated with the vehicle and not with the driver.

This information is crucial for our solution since the alerts are personalized and are tailored to the driver, based on their driving patterns. Although it is plausible to assume this information can be deduced from the data, facing the fact that a Hackathon is limited in time, we decided not to do so. Moreover, we believe this type of information shall be reliable and therefore be gathered explicitly, and that it is fairly simple to do.

This identification is essential when a driver is using the system for the first few times, and there is no sufficient data about their driving patterns. This information is also required if we want to add profiles to the system, such as a new driver profile, where the alert thresholds may be lowered, due to the lack of driving experience.

Safety Matters — About Us

This project was a result of great teamwork of Adi Goldenberg, Data Scientist, Dafna Mordechai, Senior Software Engineer, Noa Raindel, Algorithm Developer, and Ortal Ashkenazi, Data Science Researcher.

You can find more about our project in this excellent article by Wen Lin, Innovation Manager at Zurich Insurence.

HackZurich — Take the Challange!

On the last event of HackZurich, there were more than 5,500 applications from more than 60 countries! Sounds like fun? Save the date: applications for HackZurich 2019 (Sep 27–29) open on June 7.