I’ve come to realize there is a lot of confusion about the different types of co-relation that you can perform on a data set. Let me clear up the smoke on this starting with the Pearson Coefficient of Correlation.

What is correlation?

Correlation is a bi-variate analysis that measures the strength of association between two variables and the direction of the relationship. In terms of the strength of relationship, the value of the correlation coefficient varies between +1 and -1. A value of ± 1 indicates a perfect degree of association between the two variables. As the correlation coefficient value goes towards 0, the relationship between the two variables will be weaker. The direction of the relationship is indicated by the sign of the coefficient; a + sign indicates a positive relationship and a - sign indicates a negative relationship.

Usually, in statistics, we measure four types of correlations:

Pearson correlation

Kendall rank correlation

Spearman correlation

Point-Biserial correlation.

Pearson R Correlation

As the title suggests, we’ll only cover Pearson correlation coefficient. I’ll keep this short but very informative so you can go ahead and do this on your own. Pearson correlation coefficient is a measure of the strength of a linear association between two variables — denoted by r. You’ll come across Pearson r correlation

Questions a Pearson correlation answers

Is there a statistically significant relationship between age and height?

Is there a relationship between temperature and ice cream sales?

Is there a relationship among job satisfaction, productivity, and income?

Which two variable have the strongest co-relation between age, height, weight, size of family and family income?

Assumptions

1. For the Pearson r correlation, both variables should be normally distributed. i.e the normal distribution describes how the values of a variable are distributed. This is sometimes called the ‘Bell Curve’ or the ‘Gaussian Curve’. A simple way to do this is to determine the normality of each variable separately using the Shapiro-Wilk Test.