Research Overview

This research explores the idea of using different spatial audio formats for training music source separation neural networks. DeepConvSep, a library designed by Marius Miron, Pritish Chandna, Gerard Erruz, and Hector Martel, is used as a framework for testing different convolutional neural networks for source separation. A listening test is then detailed and test results are analyzed in order to perform a perceptual evaluation of the models. Conclusions are drawn regarding the effectiveness of using spatial audio formats for training source separation neural networks.

Introduction

Neural networks for audio seek to enable an artificial intelligence to speak and hear akin to a human. There have been many obstacles in the development of this field as audio contains an abundance of information, ranging from tens of thousands of different frequency and phase components as well as external, unwanted noise and the potential for multiple sources. In order to solve this problem, several methods currently exist to condense and reformat audio into data vectors that are more compatible with input into a neural network.

The advent of spatial audio formats such as binaural and ambisonic audio has created the potential for more “natural sounding” audio than stereo. However, there have been little prior studies into whether or not these more “natural sounding” audio formats would benefit a neural network in its attempt to learn and understand sound. This research seeks to experiment with this idea by training and perceptually evaluating several source separation neural network models that are trained with different audio formats.

Source Separation

Conceptual Foundation

Source separation is a process that aims to separate audio mixtures into their respective source elements, whether it be music or speech, etc. The fields of automatic speech recognition (ASR), music post-production, and music information retrieval (MIR) have all benefitted from research into improvements to source separation techniques [1]. Source separation can be further subdivided into two…