Performing a Time Series Analysis on the AAPL Stock Index. Ifeoma Ojialor · Follow 11 min read · Dec 5, 2019 -- 9 Share

A step by step process to forecast time series data.

“Investors should purchase stocks like they purchase groceries, not like they purchase perfume.” -Ben Graham

Introduction:

Time series in simple terms means data collected over time and is dependent on it. Most businesses work on time series data to determine the amount of sales they would receive in the next year, website traffic, number of calls received. Time series data can be used for forecasting. Examples of time series data include; stock prices, temperature over time, heights of ocean tides, and so on.

We will focus our attention on forecasting stock prices using time series analysis. Forecasting stock prices is a very difficult and challenging task in the financial market because the trends of stock prices are non-linear and non-stationary time-series data. The main idea of this article is to predict the future stock prices of a particular company to help us when investing. In investing, a time series tracks the movement of the chosen data points, such as a security’s price, over a specified period of time with data points recorded at regular intervals.

Disclaimer: The purpose of this article is not to provide you with a trading strategy but rather to serve as a guide to forecast your time series data.

Components of a time series

Trend: Trend is a general direction in which something is developing or changing. In the stock market, an uptrend is an overall increase in price(higher highs and lows) while a downtrend is marked as a decrease in price(lower highs and lows). Seasonality: A predictable change or pattern that repeats at a regular time interval. For instance, a time series data that repeats its pattern every 12 months.

Problem Statement:

We have been tasked with forecasting the price of the AAPL(Apple) stock index and have been provided with historical data. This includes features like opening and closing stock prices, volume, date, and so on. As a data scientist, which kind of problem would you classify this as? Time series modeling, of course.