Project aims and background

Airbnb is a home-sharing platform that allows home-owners and renters (‘hosts’) to put their properties (‘listings’) online, so that guests can pay to stay in them. Hosts are expected to set their own prices for their listings. Although Airbnb and other sites provide some general guidance, there are currently no free and accurate services which help hosts price their properties using a wide range of data points.

Paid third party pricing software is available, but generally you are required to put in your own expected average nightly price (‘base price’), and the algorithm will vary the daily price around that base price on each day depending on day of the week, seasonality, how far away the date is, and other factors.

Airbnb pricing is important to get right, particularly in big cities like London where there is lots of competition and even small differences in prices can make a big difference. It is also a difficult thing to do correctly — price too high and no one will book. Price too low and you’ll be missing out on a lot of potential income.

This project aims to solve this problem, by using machine learning and deep learning to predict the base price for properties in London. I’ve explored the preparation and cleaning of Airbnb data and conducted some exploratory data analysis in previous posts. This post is all about the creation of models to predict Airbnb prices.

The dataset

The dataset used for this project comes from Insideairbnb.com, an anti-Airbnb lobby group that scrapes Airbnb listings, reviews and calendar data from multiple cities around the world. The dataset was scraped on 9 April 2019 and contains information on all London Airbnb listings that were live on the site on that date (about 80,000).

The data is quite messy, and has some limitations. The major one is that it only includes the advertised price (sometimes called the ‘sticker’ price). The sticker price is the overall nightly price that is advertised to potential guests, rather than the actual average amount paid per…