Predictive Maintenance: detect Faults from Sensors with CNN

Photo by Bruce Warrington on Unsplash

In Machine Learning the topic of Predictive Maintenance is becoming more popular with the passage of time. The challenges are not easy and very heterogenous: it’s useful to have a good knowledge of the domain or to be in touch with people who know how the underlying system works. For these reasons when a data scientist engages himself in this new field of battle has to follow a linear and rational approach, keeping in mind that the easiest solutions are always the better ones.

In this article, we will take a look at a classification problem. We will apply a simple but very powerful model made with CNN in Keras and we will try to give a visual explanation of our results.

THE DATASET

I decided to take a dataset from the evergreen UCI repository (Condition monitoring of hydraulic systems).

The data set was experimentally obtained with a hydraulic test rig. This test rig consists of a primary working and a secondary cooling-filtration circuit which are connected via the oil tank. The system cyclically repeats constant load cycles (duration 60 seconds) and measures process values such as pressures, volume flows and temperatures while the condition of four hydraulic components (cooler, valve, pump and accumulator) is quantitatively varied.

We can image to have a hydraulic pipe system which cyclically receives impulse due to e.g. the transition of particular type of liquid in the pipeline. This phenomenon lasts 60 seconds and was measured by different sensors (Sensor Physical quantity Unit Sampling rate, PS1 Pressure bar, PS2 Pressure bar, PS3 Pressure bar, PS4 Pressure bar, PS5 Pressure bar, PS6 Pressure bar, EPS1 Motor power, FS1 Volume flow, FS2 Volume flow, TS1 Temperature, TS2 Temperature, TS3 Temperature, TS4 Temperature, VS1 Vibration, CE Cooling efficiency, CP Cooling power, SE Efficiency factor) with different Hz frequencies.

Our purpose is to predict the condition of four hydraulic components which compose the pipeline. These target condition values are annotated in the form of integer values (easy to encode) and say us if a particular component is…