Dealing with images is not a trivial task. To you, as a human, it’s easy to look at something and immediately know what is it you’re looking at. But computers don’t work that way.

Photo by Lenin Estrada on Unsplash

Tasks that are too hard for you, like complex arithmetics, and math in general, is something that a computer chews without breaking a sweat. But here the exact opposite applies — tasks that are trivial to you, like recognizing is it cat or dog in an image are really hard for a computer. In a way, we are a perfect match. For now at least.

While image classification and tasks that involve some level of computer vision might require a good bit of code and a solid understanding, reading text from a somewhat well-formatted image turns out to be a one-liner in Python —and can be applied to so many real-life problems.

And in today’s post, I want to prove that claim. There will be some installation to go though, but it shouldn’t take much time. These are the libraries you’ll need:

OpenCV

PyTesseract

I don’t want to prolonge this intro part anymore, so why don’t we jump into the good stuff now.

OpenCV

Now, this library will only be used to load the images(s), you don’t actually need to have a solid understanding of it beforehand (although it might be helpful, you’ll see why).

According to the official documentation:

OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision Library) is an open source computer vision and machine learning software library. OpenCV was built to provide a common infrastructure for computer vision applications and to accelerate the use of machine perception in the commercial products. Being a BSD-licensed product, OpenCV makes it easy for businesses to utilize and modify the code.[1]

In a nutshell, you can use OpenCV to do any kind of image transformations, it’s fairly straightforward library.

If you don’t already have it installed, it’ll be just a single line in terminal:

pip install opencv-python

And that’s pretty much it. It was easy up until this point, but that’s about to change.

PyTesseract