Reducing Uncertainty: The less you know, the more you learn

In an era where data has become so prevalent, we’ve become too accustomed on solving problems where we feel we have “enough data” and dismiss the ones where we feel there is a lack of. To make matters worse, the buzz of Big Data has altered our expectations to render small data as useless, uninformative, and quite frankly boring. But that’s why we have data scientists, right?

In fact, the title, data scientists, is a bit redundant; what exactly is the other type of scientist? Isn’t every scientist a data scientist? According to sciencecouncil.org, a scientist is someone who:

systematically gathers and uses research and evidence, making a hypothesis and testing it, to gain and share understanding and knowledge.

In essence, science is more about gathering data than about having data. We should instead view ourselves as business or possibly decision scientists: observing and collecting data in order to inform our decisions.

I’ll demonstrate using 3 examples how the very act of gathering, especially where little, or no data is available, can be rewarding.

#1 Estimating Percent of Contaminated Fish

Let’s say there’s a rumor of an outbreak of a certain water-borne disease at a nearby lake that has potentially infected the fish. You have absolutely no idea what fraction of the fish (if any) have been infected. If you wanted to be 100% certain what percent of fish are infected, you’d need to sample every fish (an unreasonable and expensive feat). Instead, you decide to randomly sample a several fish and observe whether they’re contaminated? Of course we know the more we sample, the better our estimate. That said however, does our net increase in the certainty of our estimate grow or diminish as we sample more and more fish? In other words, is the increase in certainty we gain in sampling the 1st fish equal to, less than, or more than the increase in certainty we gain in sampling the 1000th fish? Lets establish a few things before continuing: