Microscopy images are widely used for the diagnosis of various diseases such as infections and cancers. Furthermore, they facilitate basic biomedical research that has been continuously generating new insights into the causes of human diseases. Therefore, microscopy images are of great importance in improving our health. However, obtaining high-quality in-focus microscopy images poses one of the biggest challenges in the field of microscopy. For example, certain tissues, such as lung and intestines, are uneven and can result in out-of-focus images. In this post, we will tackle this problem by using deep learning to refocus out-of-focus microscopy images. In other words, we will turn out-of-focus microscopy images into in-focus ones (see the figure below) using deep learning.

Left: out of focus. Right: in focus (Image source: https://data.broadinstitute.org/bbbc/BBBC006/)

Data

We will be using the Broad Bioimage Benchmark Collection 006 (BBBC006) image set, which was acquired from one 384-well microplate containing human cells whose nuclei were labeled by Hoechst stains. A z-stack of 32 images (z = 16 at the optimal focal plane, 15 images above the focal plane, and 16 below) was taken for each of the 768 fields of view (384 wells, 2 fields of view per well).

Approach

The overall strategy is to build a convolutional neural network that takes out-of-focus images as input and generates in-focus images as output. We will base our neural network on the U-net architecture. In addition, we will use feature loss (originally called perceptual loss by Johnson et al. ) as the loss function to quantify the differences between the output of the neural network and its corresponding optimal focal plane image at z = 16, or the target.

U-net

U-net was originally developed by Ronneberge et al. for biomedical image segmentation problems. U-net essentially consists of three components: a downsampling path that reduces the image size, a subsequent upsampling path that increases the image size, and cross connections that transfer activations from selected parts of the downsampling path to their corresponding parts in the upsampling…