Reinventing Personalization For Customer Experience

“Remember that a person’s name is, to that person, the sweetest and most important sound in any language.” — Dale Carnegie, How to Win Friends and Influence People

When it comes to building good relationships with customers, learning their names is an essential step for businesses at any level. Consumers expect to be treated as individuals when it comes to the brands they do business with. Remembering a person’s name and using it whenever appropriate is key to winning that person over to your way of thinking. This fact is backed by science which says that hearing one’s own name has a powerful impact on the listener’s brain. Hence, it is only logical to remember and use not only the customers’ names, but also their likes and dislikes to make them feel valued — in other words, providing consumers with a personalized customer experience can change them into brand loyalists in no time.

Personalizing the customer experience across all touch points

The age of the customer marked the end of the one-size-fits-all messaging era. Today, a single message can’t get the job done unless it’s perfectly tailored to relate with every customer. This is the age where consumers are more empowered than ever before and in control of their relationship with a brand. These consumers continually demand personalization throughout the buying journey.

Living in a noisy world of instant gratification, how can a business make an impression in an already overcrowded field? It’s simple actually — by making use of something known as the “cocktail party” effect. Here’s how cocktail party effect works: when you’re at a cocktail party with dozens of people chattering around you, you’ll find that you can easily blur out those conversations. To you, they’re just background noise. But, as soon as someone says your name or something that is of particular interest to you, your ears perk up and tune into that specific conversation. This information will rise above the noise because it is important to you.

Similarly, adding a personal touch to the customer experience, for instance, using dynamic recipient name tags in emails can enable businesses to get their voice heard, allowing them to stand out in an overcrowded market.

Personalization — A winning strategy