Saliency Based Image Segmentation

Often when we are presented with an image, there is a point of focus in the image. This might be a person, a building, or even a bucket. There are clear portions of an image that are of little interest. Such regions are usually characterized by lack of focus in the image, monotone coloring, or smooth texture. When such a class of images is presented, it can be desirable to segment the object of interest from the rest of the image. This article explores the segmentation of such salient images.

Examples of salient images. The bucket (left) and person (right) are the objects of interest.

This project initially stemmed from an interest to develop an autonomous method of generating trimaps of an image. Trimaps are image masks that when coupled with a matting algorithm are used to segment an image while paying attention to details between the foreground and background. A trimap normally contains a white region that defines the foreground, a black region that defines the background, and dividing grey region that represents a region of uncertainty.

The problem with most matting algorithms is that they expect the trimap to be provided by the user, a task that can be time consuming. There were two primary papers I referenced that attempt to address autonomous trimap generation [1] [2]. In the first paper, Hsieh et al. uses a fairly straightforward and easily implementable approach. Unfortunately, their approach is not entirely autonomous as it requires the user to provide a rectangular region for a Grabcut algorithm. Gupta et al. instead uses a saliency approach to predict what the region of interest is. Yet, their saliency method is quite involved, combining the results of three different saliency algorithms. One of these algorithms utilize convoluted neural networks, a technique I wanted to avoid for the ease of implementation.

Besides the need for human assistance, Hsieh’s et al. algorithm produces reasonable results. I figured if I could automate the Grabcut portion of the paper, the rest of their algorithm would solve the initial problem. I drew inspiration from the method proposed by Gupta et al. to create this autonomy.

Method

With most forms of image segmentation, the goal is to binarize the image into regions of interest. The goal in this project is no different…