Photo by Randy Fath on Unsplash

Member-only story Should We Adapt Infrastructure for Future Technology?

When new technology grows popular in the public sphere, infrastructure is modified to better accommodate that technology. In early colonial America, port cities often implemented cobble stone streets. While today, such paths are romanticized, they were originally paved to improve the traction of a horse’s hooves with the ground. As a beast of burden at the time, the horse helped carry massive loads of cargo and the cobble stone streets gave hooves more pushing power.

Much more recently, major cities have adapted to the ubiquity of smart phone technology. New York City replaced telephone booths with charging stations and Wi-Fi hot spots. Many modern transportation systems, such as planes and subways, also have access to Wi-Fi. The city of Tel-Aviv recently implemented floor traffic lights, allowing phone glued pedestrians to know the state of the cross walk.

Both of these examples are reactionary infrastructure changes. A technology (or horse) became widely used, and accommodating public infrastructure was built in response. However, an almost reverse problem exists in much of modern automation technology. As companies attempt to introduce self-driving cars, flying taxis, cargo drones, and delivery robots to the public sphere, they are constantly battling to adapt to the inconsistent world we’ve already created. So the question arises, should we modify our own world to better suit the autonomous technology of the future?

Present self driving cars rely on multiple types of sensors for detecting their surroundings. Besides GPS, autonomous vehicles incorporate LIDAR and radar sensors to assist with navigating and interpreting their environment. Tesla vehicles use color vision cameras for navigation. While all these sensors have their physical limitations, they’re only as good as the algorithms that interpret them. Many vehicles depend on learning algorithms to better improve their driving when corner cases arise. Such an approach suggests that mistakes need to be made first. Companies such as Waymo, put their vehicles through wacky situations to improve performance. Perhaps there are untapped technologies that can contribute to the robustness of these…