Statistical Learning and Knowledge Engineering All the Way Down

Photo by Joao Tzanno on Unsplash

Doug Lenat, CEO of Cycorp, Inc. and AAAI Fellow, gave an interesting keynote talk at the AAAI Spring Symposium at Stanford University during the AAAI-Make session.

Current trends in society contrast with the common perception that people are becoming more and more educated. Indeed, facts show that we live in times when we can see:

rampant innumeracy (i.e., ignorance in mathematical related issues, including very basic concepts) in average population, independently of age, gender, and social class. As an example, see this case: “Why should we pay the same amount for a third of a pound of meat as we do for a quarter-pound of meat at McDonald’s? You’re overcharging us.”

(i.e., ignorance in mathematical related issues, including very basic concepts) in average population, independently of age, gender, and social class. As an example, see this case: “Why should we pay the same amount for a third of a pound of meat as we do for a quarter-pound of meat at McDonald’s? You’re overcharging us.” general decrease of connection to reality and knowledge, which ends up into self-justified ignorance of facts (because you can rely on Google!)

and knowledge, which ends up into self-justified ignorance of facts (because you can rely on Google!) widely agreed disbelief that there is (and that there can be) an actual objective reality

supposition that answers to questions are always available,

Today, people rely on machines for knowledge while current engines do not have the logic to put together knowledge from many different sources and draw conclusions or answers.

Photo by Lacie Slezak on Unsplash

For instance, is the Eiffel Tower taller than the US Capitol? The answer cannot be found completely automatically on Google, because no existing web page discusses this explicitly, although the individual pieces of the answer are available.

This is due to the difficulties of machine learning: