Introduction

Survival analysis is a “censored regression” where the goal is to learn time-to-event function. This is similar to the common regression analysis where data-points are uncensored. Survival modeling is not as equally famous as regression and classification. Therefore, I would explain it more in detail with example. This is a modeling task that has censored data. Censored data are the data where the event of interest doesn’t happen during the time of study or we are not able to observe the event of interest due to some reasons.

Censoring Types and Examples

Left Censoring occurs when we start the study/campaign and the event has already happened leading to higher Example — We want to study about users buying new iPhone given offers, but some users might have already bought it is not useful to throw this data out.

Interval Censoring is used when we don’t know the exact time of the event and it could happen between time interval. Example — Users buying Insurance where users not sure about the exact date of purchase.

Right Censoring is used when an event has not happened during the time of the study. Example — Treatment received to the cancer patients.

Censored Data-Types

Time-to-event modeling is critical for understanding users/companies' behaviors not limited to credit, cancer, and attrition risks.

Cox-Proportional Hazard model is a semi-parametric model where we model hazard ratio using predictors while in accelerated Failure time log of survival time is modeled using predictors. It is parametric survival modeling as we are assuming the distribution of response data.

Below is the Flow-Chart of Survival Modeling-

Flow Chart — Survival Machine Learning

State of Art

Tree-based models have improved the supervised learning to lead to many prizes on Kaggle and performed better in the industry as well. We have gradient boosting models implemented in R and python both for Cox-Proportional Hazard Function and Accelerated Failure Time. It is natural to develop more tree-based models for survival modeling as well. For Example — GBM, mboost, Scikit-survival and etc. Currently, XGBoost supports the Cox-Ph model without baseline prediction. Therefore, we have included Accelerated Failure Time in Xgboost to improve survival modeling support.

Data Type Support

Most of the survival models support only the right censoring data types. We have generally 4 types of data — Right, Left, Interval, and Uncensored. Right censored is the most used censored data type. It is also important to understand other censoring types.

Distribution Type Support

Accelerated Failure Time Modeling is parametric survival modeling where survival time follows certain distribution, unlike Cox-Proportional Hazard Model. We support 3 types of distribution — Normal, Logistic, and Extreme. The normal distribution is the most common distribution type but it has a thin tail which might not be the right choice in case of the fat tail events or of extreme events.

It's better to visualize it.