If the title of this blog post seems somewhat familiar, it’s likely because you’ve heard of or read this thoroughly-sourced paper released back in June of this year. The paper lays out an overview of the myriad areas machine learning can provide impactful solutions to mitigate the effects of climate change. While the entire paper is worth summarizing (and reading!), for this blog post I will focus on two specific areas that I found interesting: carbon emission capture/reduction and climate prediction.

Carbon Emission Capture/Reduction

In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimated that, within 30 years, the world will be facing catastrophic consequences if we do not limit and severely reduce global greenhouse gas emissions. Despite international accords, global protests, and the overwhelming scientific consensus that we need to reduce our emissions if we are to avoid catastrophe, our global emissions continue to increase. If governments are unwilling to act as quickly as necessary to decrease emissions, then investment in carbon-capturing technologies is a necessity. While the technology itself exists, it is in its infancy. But machine learning can aid this new technology in a variety of ways.

The paper outlines three options for reducing carbon emissions. It also admits that, while these technologies do currently exist, the applications they outline, specifically as it pertains to machine learning, are speculative.

1) Natural or Semi-Natural Methods

While global emissions have been increasing year over year, deforestation has also added fuel to the fire. About half of the world’s tropical forests have already been cleared. Even worse, estimates put total deforestation at 18.7 million acres of forest per year, the equivalent of 27 soccer fields worth of forest being cleared every minute. In total, deforestation accounts for roughly 15% of all greenhouse gas emissions.

Given all the deforestation occurring, providing tools to help track deforestation can provide valuable data for policy-makers and law enforcement. According to the paper, machine learning can help “differentiate selective cutting from clearcutting using remote sensing imagery.” It can…