Image credit : Quantitative Scientific Solutions

The twin motors of data and information technology are driving innovation forward in most every aspect of human enterprise. In a similar fashion, Data Science today profoundly influences how business is done in fields as diverse as the life sciences, smart cities, and transportation. As cogent as these directions have become, the dangers of data science without ethical considerations is as equally apparent — whether it be the protection of personally identifiable data, implicit bias in automated decision-making, the illusion of free choice in psychographics, the social impacts of automation, or the apparent divorce of truth and trust in virtual communication. Justifying the need for focus on the ethics of data science goes beyond a balance sheet of these opportunities and challenges, for the practice of data science challenges our perceptions of what it means to be human.

If ethics is defined as shared values that help humanity differentiate right from wrong, the increasing digitalization of human activity shapes the very definitions of how we evaluate the world around us.

Margo Boenig-Liptsin points out that our ever-increasing reliance on information technology has fundamentally transformed traditional concepts of “privacy”, “fairness” and “representation”, not to mention “free choice”, “truth” and “trust”.[i] These mutations underline the increasing footprint and responsibilities of data science — beyond the bytes and bits, data science shakes the perceptual foundations of value, community, and equity. If academia has been quick to establish Data Science programs around statistics, computation and software engineering, few programs address the larger societal concerns of data science, and fewer still analyse how responsible data practices can be conditioned and even encouraged.[ii] Let’s sketch out the contours of this challenge.

Data citizens

Perhaps no area of ethics in data science has received more attention today than the protection of personal data. The digital transformation of our interactions with social and economics communities reveals who we are, what we think, and what we do. The recent introduction of legislation in Europe (GDPR), India (the Personal Data Protection Act, 2018)., and California (the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018) specifically recognize the rights of digital…