Photo credit: Annie Spratt, UK

I’ve become something of a MOOC connoisseur; at this point in my journey to employment, I’ve tried every major MOOC and I still dabble to keep things fresh on the brain.

The great thing is, I learned a ton without spending much money. So far Udacity was the most expensive, and I got it on an interest-free loan. Often they offer discounts and many of them run on a monthly subscription for $30–50. For brevity, I don’t want to focus on the syllabus of each program here, but explain their strengths and weaknesses.

Part of my motivation for doing so many courses was my interest in education; I think the MOOC format’s made a lot of bright people rethink learning, and Coursera and SharpestMinds offer an important format that could compete with some aspects of academia. If you remember nothing else, though: MOOCs are a great way to build an industry skill and augment your education; they supply you with the skill-building academia can not. They are not a substitute for academic education and you will still need to

build your own projects, and answer your own questions

to become a data scientist. The closest one to academia would be Coursera. Ultimately I became a data scientist by using a combination of MOOCs, self-studying books, and leveraging my formal education.

Codecademy:

I highly recommend Codecademy Pro. Price is worth it and exercises really give the right amount of brainhurt, along with good explanations. I recommend clearing your progress on certain lessons and redoing them if you had trouble (reworking missed problems is good practice for anything technical).

I did their essential Python 3 course to make me a better Python user, but they have a Computer Science career track which is more involved and covers topics like recursion, algorithms and data structures.

The strength of Codecademy lies in its combination of code-alongs, guided projects, quizzes and videos: they are really pushing for a holistic understanding of the material. You need all those formats to truly understand something technical.

Dataquest:

Imagine Codecademy, but harder. These lessons are incredibly detailed. It’s a great place to learn, but it will take a lot of time to do even a normal mission. I love their ethos of “quality education at a low price” ($30/month currently, $50 for the Premium plan, much cheaper if you buy a year) which makes it accessible to anyone willing to roll up their sleeves and work. For me, since I already covered a lot of these concepts, I didn’t find it worthwhile to complete any of the major certificates, but struggling through missions made me a better coder and practitioner of data science.

On the Premium plan you get a monthly call with a mentor and he’ll review your resume or give technical advice; take advantage of this opportunity. The most valuable thing they can give you is criticism.

Dataquest offers a nice curriculum selection that will take you on up to advanced Python topics and, as somewhat of a statistics pro, I found their explanation of stats very good. I recommend going from Codecademy to Dataquest to move beyond foundational skills and get strong.

My one complaint is they could turn down the difficulty a hair; there’s something to be said for repetition and plug-and-chug when learning an applied skill. However, they cover an enormous amount of material and seem to have the best SQL courses of any MOOC. They go into Redshift and really advanced data engineering stuff. I’d consider a few DQ missions essential for any aspiring data scientist and it almost makes other MOOCs obsolete.

DataCamp:

My opinion is: DataCamp’s an earnest shot at education. It’s a great place to get your feet wet and the video format is noobie-friendly. I enjoyed it at the time, but it‘s only step 1 of a long process. The code-along format is like Codecademy, but you don’t write code, just fill in blanks. There is some nice brainhurt here, but it’s not the best bang for your buck.

Videos (and lectures in general) aren’t a great way to teach a technical concept. If you’re totally new to data science, this is a nice place to start and get motivated, but I’d still recommend DataQuest.

Many DataCamp learners (myself included) report doing a DC course then going over to DataQuest to strengthen their skills, which is something I recommend (studying the same thing from different sources is always good practice).

I will say DataCamp has the best selection of R courses and if you are looking to familiarize yourself with a new R package, you can’t go wrong with DataCamp; their lecturers are world-class. It also exposes you to what good code looks like. At $30/month I’d say a few months is a good way to augment your education.

Udacity (Machine Learning Engineer):

This program covers the major ML algorithms and I thought the videos were helpful for things I’d already studied; they expanded my understanding of things like SVMs, but I don’t think they’d teach it to you alone.

The projects here are also good and the mini-labs (not required) are nice skill-builders. I thought the staff grading my projects were great and very thorough. They really pushed me to write good explanations of every tool I used, and justify my decisions.

$2000 is the current full list price for this program, and I think they’ve actually dismantled it and changed it fundamentally. The Machine Learning Engineer program I see on the site now seems smaller and focused on deployment and data engineering, whereas what I took discussed all the major ML and Deep Learning algorithms (with no coverage of deployment).

Ultimately I’d say $2000 is way too much for what I got out of this, and the “Career Services” from Udacity are a joke (I got a good resume review and that was it). It will, however, look good on your resume and has probably helped me land interviews.

Springboard (Intermediate Data Science w/ Python):

Springboard does not create much content of their own, instead linking you to free or low-cost education resources around the web. For machine learning fundamentals I think this is a good idea; there’s plenty of quality content out there so why reinvent the wheel at students’ expense? It’s oriented for students making data science projects in Jupyter for the first time, and does its job well (previous MOOCs I listed are all in-browser code-alongs without pulling up your own Jupyter notebook).

The really valuable asset of SpringBoard is their mentors. This was my first time seeing a lot of Machine Learning concepts and my mentor really grilled me to make sure I know my stuff. Brilliant guy.

At $500/month I’d consider this program a great way to build your chops. Get ready to be challenged, earn a nice certificate, and interact with an experienced mentor. Student support from the staff and community is quite cool and staff quickly responds to emails. I wouldn’t be anywhere in data science without them.

SharpestMinds:

SharpestMinds offered what I’d been looking for a long time, being a guy in a smallish city with a smaller tech scene: a chance to interact with real data scientists. You need to apply to get in, and to acquire a mentor you should be like 80% of the way there on education/skillset, but once you’re in you’re golden.

The other mentees are bright and about as far along in data science as I, so the community Slack has interesting projects and posts. Often in the Slack, folks will say “My company’s hiring, shoot me a message if you’re interested in X topic.”

After walking across the graduation stage with my MS in Pure Math, I felt like someone pushed me out a plane and said “Quick, get a job before you hit the ground.” SharpestMinds was like the 101st Airborne Division appearing out of the sky and handing me a parachute.

This is probably the best ‘career services’ of any MOOC or Bootcamp, ever, since they don’t get paid until you find a job. SM now averages one new hire every 3 days (an impressive feat considering how difficult landing an entry-level data science role is in 2019).

Part of its success stems from its specificity and selectivity: this NOT a program for people wondering “Is data science for me?” It’s for people with significant knowledge under their belt trying to land the best entry-level DS role. You will need to work hard to with SM and build an ambitious project with your mentor, and once you’re hired you owe them a small portion of your first year’s salary (they’re upfront about this arrangement). They also put a lot of focus on your resume and online presence, and the mentors coach you with mock interviews.

Essentially, this is not a MOOC or a bootcamp, but an education and career service for those trying to turn pro.

Coursera:

A great format for learning. It’s fundamentally different from code-along MOOCs but instead focuses on conceptual understanding. The quizzes here genuinely make you think and I never felt the videos were wasting my time.

I used Coursera for an introductory R course and introductory SQL, which helped me snag a lot of interviews because employers are always looking for someone who knows SQL. I probably don’t need to tell you about Coursera, but if you’re applying for jobs, make sure you have a few of their certificates on your resume and LinkedIn; the old guard don’t know all the new MOOCs but everyone knows (and respects) Coursera.

Be the Real McCoy:

Don’t forget that, to build coding skills, you’ll need to stop by Edabit or Hackerrank and see if you can level up. Start easy and don’t get ahead of yourself, make those fundamentals really strong (you’ll need them when you’re slicing strings backwards and building time series graphs). People become programmers by coding hours a day for months. You will inevitably need to find interesting datasets and test your knowledge yourself on them; no MOOC can recreate this. If you want to become a data scientist, don’t just knock out MOOCs to make your resume look good; actually build the skills employers are looking for.