The man with a suit and a straw hat

To detect anomaly is to detect outliers. This might seem straightforward but is not always the case. The question is, how do you define an outlier?

Let’s first imagine a man wearing a suit. This is normal. Then imagine a man wearing a straw hat, this is also normal. Now put these two pictures into one, imagine the same man wearing a suit and a straw hat. Being formal and casual at the same time? That seems abnormal.

This is a common situation of anomaly detection in cases like predictive maintenance. In data scientists’ wording, it is sometimes not a single feature that says about an anomaly, but a combination of multiple features.

We should not look at the picture in its part but step back to see its entirety.

There are different ways to detect an anomaly. The most common approach is to create a normal profile of situations, and then classify everything else as abnormal. Here, we will look into a rather different kind of model that learns from a few instances of anomalies — Isolation Forest. The word “isolation” implies we can find anomaly through the notion of distance. Intuitively, the more abnormal a data point is, the more isolated it is from the rest.

In real-world applications, most datasets have multiple dimensions. For example, for predictive maintenance, relevant features can be the machine’s vibration, sound, and so on. To simplify, we just consider here a one-dimensional data shown as a few blue circles. Humans can observe easily, the one being most isolated to the right, is an anomaly. But how does a machine go about finding it?

Let’s use needles as an illustration. Suppose someone is flying above, randomly throwing a needle that will end up standing still on the line. And there is an equal chance for that needle to land in any position from the furthest left to the furthest right sample.

If the needle lands between 3 and 4, it isolates 4. If the needle lands between 1 and 2, it isolates 1. If the needle lands between 2 and 3, it does not isolate any, and thus we continue throwing more needles until at least one sample is…