The Geometry of Thought

By José Ferraz de Almeida Júnior [Public domain]

We think every day, but it’s hard to pinpoint what exactly we mean by the word. When we try to understand thought, we have to grasp thought by thinking about thought itself, which feels ever so slightly elusive and circular.

And then there are a hundred different ways of thinking about a thing. What do you actually do when thinking about an apple? When thinking of the color red? When thinking about abstract concepts like love, grief, pride, existence?

Wikipedia defines thought as an “aim-oriented flow of ideas and associations that can lead to a reality-oriented conclusion”.

The flow of ideas is easily observable. Think of an apple, and see what happens, which different perceptual dimensions present themselves. A glimpse of red-green peel, a hard-to-define sweet and fruity taste, maybe a hint of sourness, the crunchy sound of a bite, the sensation of juice running down your hand.

The reality-oriented conclusion is naturally given: we shouldn’t forget that our thinking has evolved to serve an evolutionary purpose. Thought exists because it helps the genetic machinery at the heart of life propel itself onward into the future. Thought exists because it allows us to observe useful, structured patterns in the messy world in which we find ourselves. To separate the wheat of useful information from the chaff of irrelevant one.

It serves a purpose to know an apple from a poisonous fruit, to understand if it's ripe and ready to be eaten, to understand what an apple is, what properties it has although every individual apple you will encounter is ever so slightly different.

It serves a purpose to be able to compare apples and oranges. And it makes sense to be able to communicate your thoughts with the people surrounding you, to tell them what it is you feel, what it is you saw.

From the photograph you quickly inferred that these are apples. Photo by Marina Khrapova on Unsplash

There are certain tasks that we constantly need in everyday life, so the brain is optimized to do the job. On the other hand, we are not good at doing “thinking” that computers are really good at (questions…