The Fastest Way to Learn Data Science

Photo by Tim Mossholder on Unsplash

When I first started writing blogs about data science on medium I wrote a series of posts describing a complete roadmap for learning data science. I am largely self-taught in data science and over the last few years have, through trial and error, found some excellent ways to learn in a fast, efficient way. I am a stickler for efficiency and will when trying to achieve any goal aim to find the fastest route there wherever possible. In the following post, I am going to share my top tips for accelerating your learning in data science or indeed many other subjects.

Have goals you care deeply about

To keep momentum in learning you need goals you care very deeply about. I am extremely passionate about data science and my goal was to become a data scientist but that wasn’t my main driving force. I want to impact the world around me, in a positive way, with data. So my main driving force was to be able to do impactful things with data science. This resonates so deeply with me and was the single most important thing driving me forward in my learning. You need to find something that you are really passionate about and set your goals around that. Keep them in mind always, refer back to them often, this will help you to keep razor sharp focus and move forward very quickly.

It’s about what you can do

This leads onto my next point, and I really feel strongly about this, it is not about what you know it is about what you can do. Data science is a very broad subject you will never know everything. It is very easy to get lost learning the theory behind every model or all of the maths you might use up front. The key though is to focus on learning what you need to be able to do practical things with data science. So it is fine to dive straight into building a machine learning model with a widely used library. You can learn the theory later. The chances are that once you have built something and got it to work your natural curiosity will lead you to understand more of the theory behind it.