The core competency of a data analyst is “Speed to Insight”.

A data team often consists of many people, with many skills, using potentially overlapping techniques. This focus on speed distinguishes this role from data scientists or statisticians.

Today I’m focused on answering questions about the business or about how users behave. I’ll refer to these types of questions as mostly in the realm of data analysts, though some organizations call these folks data scientists, too.

A good data analyst should be able to interface directly with folks in the business unit that they’re working with. They need to have a solid understanding of business fundamentals in addition to data chops. A junior analyst may rely on business people asking smart questions, and answering the questions that they’re asked, quickly. While this is clearly helpful, it’s not the highest-leverage opportunity for an analyst.

The best analysts don’t only answer the questions that they’re asked. Actually doing analysis is often the easy part. It’s other skills that separate an average analyst from the best.

Help teammates rephrase their question.

Ask the “next 3 questions” that they should know

When you’re asked a particular question, it can be tempting to think “sure, I can answer that”. While that might be the first step, it’s important to get at the root reason for the question. If someone asks for the signup conversion rate across a section of your website, it’s the analyst’s job to dig in.

Why are you wondering about signup conversion? Would we rather measure conversion to active users? Are you interested in a particular segment? Does the signup rate vary across paid, direct, organic, and social traffic?

It’s unusual that a PM wants a metric for the sake of a metric. They’re really trying to learn something about the nature of your product or your audience. It’s your job to know enough about your data sources and about the business itself to answer the next three questions that they didn’t ask. Short circuiting the back and forth will help your team move…