A curated list of awesome libraries

source: delphinmedia, via pixabay (CC0)

In my experience as a Python user, I’ve come across a lot of different packages and curated lists. Some are in my bookmarks like the great awesome-python-data-science curated list, or awesome-python curated list. If you don’t know them, go check them out asap.

In this post, I’d like to show you something else. These are the results of late-night GitHub/Reddit browsing, and cool stuff shared by colleagues.

Some of these packages are really unique, others are just fun to use and real underdogs among the data scientist/statistician I’ve worked with.

Let’s start!

Misc (the weird ones)

Knock Knock : Send notifications from Python to mobile devices or the desktop or email.

Send notifications from Python to mobile devices or the desktop or email. tqdm: Extensible Progress Bar for Python and CLI, with built-in support for pandas.

Extensible Progress Bar for Python and CLI, with built-in support for pandas. Colorama: Simple cross-platform colored terminal text.

Simple cross-platform colored terminal text. Pandas-log: It provides feedback about basic pandas operations. Great for debugging long pipe chains.

It provides feedback about basic pandas operations. Great for debugging long pipe chains. Pandas-flavor: The easy way to extend Pandas DataFrame/Series.

The easy way to extend Pandas DataFrame/Series. More-Itertools : as it sounds, it adds additional functions similar to itertools.

as it sounds, it adds additional functions similar to itertools. streamlit : The easy way to create apps for your machine learning projects.

The easy way to create apps for your machine learning projects. SQLModel: SQLModel, SQL databases in Python, designed for simplicity, compatibility, and robustness.

Data Cleaning and Manipulation

ftfy: Fixes mojibake and other glitches in Unicode text, after the fact.

Fixes mojibake and other glitches in Unicode text, after the fact. janitor: A lot of cool functions to clean data.

A lot of cool functions to clean data. Optimus: Another package for data cleaning.

Another package for data cleaning. Great-expectations: A great package to check if your data obeys your expectations.

Data Exploration and Modelling

P andas-profile : Create an HTML report full of statistics from pandas DataFrame.

Create an HTML report full of statistics from pandas DataFrame. dabl : Allow data exploration using visualisation and preprocessing.

Allow data exploration using visualisation and preprocessing. pydqc: Allow to compare statistics between two datasets.

Allow to compare statistics between two datasets. Pandas-summary: An extension to pandas DataFrames describe function.

An extension to pandas DataFrames describe function. pivottable-js: drag’n’drop functionality for pandas inside jupyter notebook.

Data Structures

Bounter : Efficient Counter that uses a limited (bounded) amount of memory regardless of data size.

Efficient Counter that uses a limited (bounded) amount of memory regardless of data size. python-bloomfilter : Scalable Bloom Filter implemented in Python.

Scalable Bloom Filter implemented in Python. datasketch : Gives you probabilistic data structures like LSH, Weighted MinHash, HyperLogLog and more.

Gives you probabilistic data structures like LSH, Weighted MinHash, HyperLogLog and more. ranges: Continuous Range, RangeSet, and RangeDict data structures for Python

Performance Checking and Optimization

Py-spy: Sampling profiler for Python programs.

Sampling profiler for Python programs. pyperf: Toolkit to run Python benchmarks.

Toolkit to run Python benchmarks. snakeviz : An in-browser Python profile viewer with great support for Jupiter notebook.

An in-browser Python profile viewer with great support for Jupiter notebook. Cachier : Persistent, stale-free, local and cross-machine caching for Python functions.

Persistent, stale-free, local and cross-machine caching for Python functions. Faiss : A library for efficient similarity search and clustering of dense vectors.

A library for efficient similarity search and clustering of dense vectors. mypyc : A library that compile Python code to C extensions using type hints.

A library that compile Python code to C extensions using type hints. Scalene: a high-performance CPU, GPU and memory profiler for Python.

I hope you found something useful or fun for your work. I’m going to expand the post in the future, so stay tuned for new updates!