Member-only story The Hype cycle of Magic quadrants, Cool vendors and Confused clients

It’s raining AI conferences these days. If you’re at a loss in deciding which one to attend and what to make of all the hype, you’re not alone. It takes serious effort to identify events that have meaty content, then separate marketing-speak from industry intelligence, and finally put the learnings to action.

I attended the Gartner Data & Analytics Summit in Orlando, earlier this month. With over 3000 people huddling together into 150+ sessions across 5 days, the energy levels were palpable. Throw-in exhibits from 111 vendors, workshops and one-on-ones with 100+ research analysts, this sounds crazier.

In this article, I will try and unravel this mystic ecosystem that Gartner has carefully built. We’ll see why buyers hold them in high regard, and what makes the sellers do anything to get featured in it. I will provide a broad overview of their analytics conference and the key industry trends discussed.

Gartner, for the uninitiated

Gartner is into research and advisory with a broad presence across technologies & industry verticals. With 15,000+ employees serving 12,000+ clients, not many realize that the company publishing ‘hype cycles’ and ‘magic quadrants’ is a $4 Billion giant, comparable in revenues to NASDAQ or Ferrari.

The 3 key business lines of Gartner, per its annual report are:

Research : The primary offering that accounts for ~75% of revenue, and encompasses all things cool about Gartner — magic quadrants, hype cycles, cool vendors, market guides, and research reports.

The primary offering that accounts for ~75% of revenue, and encompasses all things cool about Gartner — magic quadrants, hype cycles, cool vendors, market guides, and research reports. Consulting : This encompasses the customized solutions they provide their clients, on strategy, benchmarking and purchase decisions.

This encompasses the customized solutions they provide their clients, on strategy, benchmarking and purchase decisions. Events: 70+ conferences organized around the world, including popular ones such as Gartner Symposium/ITxpo and Gartner Analytics Summit.

While this in itself may not sound unusual, the way Gartner has woven all of these offerings together and created strong interdependencies with the market is remarkable. We’ll dive into that next to see what’s their…