Are you frustrated with how hard it is to visualize your OBIEE data the way you want to? Do you wish that you could just easily (and securely) connect it to Tableau?

You can!

BI Connector allows you to securely access and use your OBIEE and Taleo data in Tableau, PowerBI, and Qlik.

(Full disclosure: I’ve been doing a little work with BI Connector lately and have definitely gotten paid by them and have had access to what they have to offer. That being said, I now know a couple of people over there and can vouch for what an awesome team they are!)

Visualize that data!

If you want to use visualizations to communicate the results of an analysis, you probably want to work with modern and easy-to-use tools like Tableau. But there’s no simple way to do this with your OBIEE data!

While OBIEE is amazing in terms of data and business analysis, it isn’t as fun as Tableau in terms of simple and intuitive visualizations.

It’s just not as cool to play with! (Especially if aren’t an OBIEE expert…)

You wouldn’t believe how many companies out there are paying tens of thousands of dollars in wasted time and effort for exports, imports, SQL staging areas, and more because they don’t know that there’s a tool that allows them to securely connect their OBIEE data directly to Tableau with just a few clicks.

Connecting OBIEE data to Tableau manually usually means wasting a ton of time creating, exporting, and importing OBIEE data into something like Tableau. With BI Connector, it’s simple. It barely takes any time at all! You log in with your OBIEE credentials, which means that you’re able to use your existing business logic. You don’t have to make any changes to OBIEE.

You save time and you save money.

GIF via GIPHY

BI Connector is perfect for anyone working in machine learning, data analysis, data visualization, business analysis, data science, and predictor analysis. It makes life easy for beginners and it gives advanced users something that they can have fun with.

It’s simple, secure, and efficient. Setup takes less than five minutes!

You can run direct query-based live connections to both subject areas and reports and immediately use your results to create gorgeous, responsive, and intuitive visualizations. You’ll avoid common errors and make faster decisions at the same time. It saves you an incredible amount of time and effort!

Photo by nickgesell via Pixabay

Image labeled for reuse via Wikimedia Commons

If you’re serious about data, there’s a good chance that you’re already using OBIEE. It’s amazing for data reporting and intelligence. It can hold a huge volume of data. It also handles complex schemas incredibly well. Plus Oracle has developed pre-defined BI solutions that are available in OBIEE. It offers interactive dashboards and reporting, actionable intelligence, proactive detection and alerts, Microsoft Office integration, and a lot more.

That being said, there are just not as many visualization options available in OBIEE as there are in Tableau. The ones that are available are definitely not as user-friendly. OBIEE also has a limited ability to work with other tools and often requires you to purchase an extra license if you want to use them. And you need to have some serious education if you want to use OBIEE the right way.

It’s also not as easy to connect your OBIEE data to Tableau as it could be. You can export your data and import it into Tableau, which leads to duplicate data, duplicate logic, and potentially inconsistent results. You could create and maintain a SQL database staging environment. But that takes time, money, and resources.

It’s also worth noting that both of these options put your data at risk of unauthorized access and other security issues.

Image labeled for reuse via Wikipedia

Tableau, on the other hand, offers gorgeous, easy-to-create visualizations. It’s intuitive and user-friendly, with simple drag-and-drop responsive charts and dashboards, one-click formulas, filters, and a lot more. (There are also some fun new features in 2019.2, including vector-based maps! You can check out the new features here.) But while Tableau can handle a lot of data, it can’t manage the huge volume of data that OBIEE can handle with ease. It’s tough to use when you have more than 25 tables or more than 16 get columns.

And everything in Tableau needs to be developed from scratch.

These two tools aren’t replacements for each other. They actually do amazing work together! But getting them to work together can be challenging.

That’s where BI Connector comes in!

BI Connector is the simple and secure way to connect OBIEE and Tableau. With BI Connector, you can create visualizations in Tableau using OBIEE data in no time. BI Connector uses the OBIEE security model, so your data is protected.

It automates the process of moving your OBIEE data into Tableau and it keeps your data safe.

Image by analogicus from Pixabay

BI Connector sits right on top of the OBIEE layer and lets you effortlessly integrate your favorite data visualization tool, whether that’s Tableau, Qlik, or Power BI. It’s simple, it’s intuitive, and it bridges the gap between technologies. That saves you an incredible amount of time and money!

BI Connector gives you plug-and-play access from what you’ve already built in OBIEE. You run your results right from your data warehouse. Plus it’s fun and secure! You’ll build Tableau visualizations while protecting your data with OBIEE security.

How to Use BI Connector to connect OBIEE and Tableau

BI Connector is incredibly easy to install. It takes less than five minutes. You can find a helpful step-by-step guide here and really helpful videos here that will walk you through the process if you run into any issues.

Step 1: Download

First, you’ll need to go to the BI Connector website to download BI Connector. You can click the button that says “Try it free” and drop down the menu to “Visualize OBIEE data in” and click on “Tableau.”

Enter your information, click the button that says “Try BI Connector for Tableau” and your download will start. There’s no credit card or commitment required. You have 30 days to try it out with no risk.

You’ll double click on the “BIConnector-Desktop-Edition-x64-Tableau.exe” file to unzip it. Specify the location and then start the installation. You’ll click on the button that says “Install” and follow the prompts.