3. Assign topic labels to chats

So the LDA model provides topic weights for each document it is trained on. Now the transition to a supervised approach becomes straightforward: the vector component with the highest weight is picked and the corresponding topic is used as target label for the given chat document. In order to increase the confidence of the labels assignment, only the texts with a dominant topic weight above 0.5 have been retained in the following steps (other thresholds have been tested too but 0.5 was the value which has allowed to keep at the same time a reasonable proportion of online chats in the dataset as well as a good degree of confidence in the assignments).

4. Classify new chats

After building a setting compatible with a supervised machine learning algorithm, the multinomial logistic regression model has been trained and tested to classify new chats to the corresponding topic labels. The classification results in terms of precision and recall have been above 0.96 (on average among the 15 topic classes) across all the iterations of the 4-fold cross-validation technique used.

There are obviously many aspects that can be tweaked and improved (e.g. handle topic classes imbalance, improve automatic translation accuracy, try using different flows for each language instead of a single one for all translated texts, etc.), but there is definitely evidence that this approach could identify meaningful and interesting topical information out of a corpus of unstructured texts and provide an algorithm that accurately assigns topics to previously unseen online chats texts.

So what?

This analysis applied to a business context similar to the one presented here shows the effectiveness of a simple framework that companies can implement internally to have an idea of the type of enquiries, complaints or issues their customers have. It can also be a starting point to have a sense of the customers sentiment or feeling about a particular product, service or bug, without explicitly asking them for a feedback. It’s a fast and efficient way to gather insights about the interactions between consultants and customers, especially if this is complemented by metadata about the conversation (e.g. date, duration) and other types of information (e.g. client sign-up date, online activity, previous complaints, etc.).