Transfer Learning Intuition for Text Classification

This post is the fourth post of the NLP Text classification series. To give you a recap, I started up with an NLP text classification competition on Kaggle called Quora Question insincerity challenge. So I thought to share the knowledge via a series of blog posts on text classification. The first post talked about the different preprocessing techniques that work with Deep learning models and increasing embeddings coverage. In the second post, I talked through some basic conventional models like TFIDF, Count Vectorizer, Hashing, etc. that have been used in text classification and tried to access their performance to create a baseline. In the third post, I delved deeper into Deep learning models and the various architectures we could use to solve the text Classification problem. In this post, I will try to use ULMFit model which is a transfer learning approach for NLP.

As a side note: if you want to know more about NLP, I would like to recommend this excellent course on Natural Language Processing in the Advanced machine learning specialization. You can start for free with the 7-day Free Trial. This course covers a wide range of tasks in Natural Language Processing from basic to advanced: sentiment analysis, summarization, dialogue state tracking, to name a few. You can start for free with the 7-day Free Trial.

Before introducing the notion of transfer learning to NLP applications, we will first need to understand a little bit about Language models.

Language Models And NLP Transfer Learning Intuition:

In very basic terms, the objective of the language model is to predict the next word given a stream of input words. In the past, many different approaches have been used to solve this particular problem. Probabilistic models using Markov assumption is one example of this sort of models.

In the recent era, people have been using RNNs/LSTMs to create such language models. They take as input a word embedding and at each time state return the probability distribution of next word probability over the dictionary words. An example of this is shown below in which the…