Laying the foundation for PACF: The auto-regressive time series

There are many phenomena in which the past influences the present. The events of yesterday can be used to foretell what will happen today. When such phenomena are represented as a time series, they are said to have an auto-regressive property. In an auto regressive time series, the current value can be expressed as a function of the previous value, the value before that one and so forth. In other words, the current value is correlated with previous values from the same time series.

If a time series is auto-regressive it is often the case that the current value’s forecast can be computed as a linear function of only the previous value and a constant, as follows:

(Image by Author)

Here T_i is the value that is forecast by the equation at the ith time step. Beta0 is the Y-intercept of the model and it applies a constant amount of bias to the forecast. It also specifies what will be the forecast for T_i if the value at the previous time step T_(i-1) happens to be zero. Beta1 tells us the rate at which T_i changes w.r.t. T_(i-1).

The key assumption behind this simple equation is that the variance in T_(i-1) is able to explain all the variance expressed by all values that are older than T_(i-1) in the time series. It is as if T_(i-1) captures all the information associated with values older than itself.

But what if this assumption were not true? What if the variance in T_(i-1) is not able to explain all of the variance contained within T_(i-2)? In that case, the above equation will not be able to feed this unexplained portion of the variance from T_(i-2) into T_i, causing the forecast for T_i to go off the mark.

Fortunately it’s easy to fix this problem adding a term to the above equation as follows:

(Image by Author)

In this equation the extra term Beta2*T_(i-2) seeks to capture the variance contained in values that are older than T_(i-1) that could not be explained by the variance in T_(i-1). It feeds this balance amount of information directly into the forecast for today’s value T_i.

With the background established let’s build the definition and the formula for the partial auto-correlation function.