Member-only story Using Natural Language Processing To Rate The Sentiment of the Game of Thrones Finale

Using Vader and TextBlob to analyze the sentiment of Tweets and reviews by major publications Fhel Dimaano · Follow 7 min read · May 22, 2019 -- Share

As an aspiring Data Scientist, the bootcamp I am attending, Flatiron School, has introduced us to Natural Language Processing. After learning about tokens, stems, lemmas and corpora, one thing that grabbed my attention was sentiment analysis. Sentiment analysis, also known as opinion mining, is the automated process of identifying and categorizing a piece of text to determine whether the attitude conveyed is positive, negative or neutral.

Here is an example of sentiment analysis in use. A travel website aired a commercial advertising their product. After multiple airings, consumers found the ad extremely irritating and voiced their opinions on social media. After a few weeks, over half of the social media mentions were negative. The company recognized this and to remedy the situation, aired a new version of the advertisement where the irritating item, in this case, a violin, was smashed.

After learning about sentiment analysis, my first thought about its use did not have anything to do with travel websites, but of a massive juggernaut of a hit show that so happened to have just aired its very last episode. I am, of course, talking about Game of Thrones. The truncated final season only has six episodes and apparently also has a truncated form of storytelling as well. The internet, however, has not been short on sharing their opinions about the show. Complaints of poor pacing, characters making uncharacteristically bad decisions and grey morality turning black and white have been some of the loudest complaints. There is even a change.org petition to remake the entire season with competent writers that has been signed by more than 1.4 million people.

Using sentiment analysis, I wondered how the final episode would fare.

I wanted people’s immediate thoughts and reactions.

I scraped twitter for tweets made within twenty four hours after the final episode had aired that contained #GameofThrones or #GameofThronesFinale.