We received a dataset of about 900 movies containing information like genre, rating, producing studio and of course the amount of moviegoers on its premiere weekend. Inspired by a whitepaper published by Google itself we tried to collect data from Google Trends to include the search volume into our predictive models. Capturing the popularity of 900 movie on Google Search is a hard task mainly due to 3 facts. First, one can only pull data of 5 search terms at a time. A problem which can quite easily be solved by chunking the search terms. This, however, results in incomparable results between the chunks. Second, movie titles are not always nonambiguous, meaning that a search for Django Unchained will almost certainly lead you to a result linked to the Tarantino movie, whereas a search for a Biopic like Hitchcock might result in a webpage about the director itself. Third, the search volume information of a search term on Google is not publicly available in an evaluable form, meaning that Google Trends only offers natural numbers, whereby the maximum relative value in the observed time and geo frame is scaled to 100, which makes it impossible to compare a movie like Star Wars — The Force Awakens to an independent movie like A Most Wanted Man, because the volume for A Most Wanted Man will mostly if not always be scaled to 0. Therefore, the main task in making Google Trends data usable for predictive models is three-sided:

Getting comparable data for all search terms of interest Scaling the data to real values for all movies from arthouse movies to blockbusters Ensuring, that the provided requests refer to the movie and nothing but the movie

To get a KPI that captures the people’s interest in a movie a linear combination of 3 possible search terms was defined. These search terms are the main title of the movie (e.g. The Hobbit), the main title of the movie + the suffix film (German for movie) and the complete title (e.g. The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey). According to this article published by Google the absolute search volume for the search term is divided by the overall search volume for the given time and geo frame.

What’s most useful for storytelling is our normalized Trends data. This means that when we look at search interest over time for a topic, we’re looking at that interest as a proportion of all searches on all topics on Google at that time and location. When we look at regional search interest for a topic, we’re looking at the search interest for that topic in a given region as a proportion of all searches on all topics on Google in that same place and time.

After this the data are normalized to a natural number range from 0 to 100, whereby the relative maximum value of the five transformed query results is scaled to 100.

The context of our numbers also matters. We index our data to 100, where 100 is the maximum search interest for the time and location selected.

This results in incomparable values which makes a prediction unfeasible.