When we try to put related business functions together in the radar diagram, it reveals the relative expansion focus of each company —

Standard Chartered

A lot of emphasis on expanding Technology related functions (Engineering, Project Management, Security)

related functions (Engineering, Project Management, Security) Risk/Compliance

Marketing (especially online/social media channels)

ZhongAn

Top priority on strengthening core business functions (Operations, Risk, Finance)

(Operations, Risk, Finance) IT and Admin

WeLab

Similar to ZhongAn, top priority on strengthening core business functions. While ZhongAn put more emphasis on expanding the Operations team, WeLab current focus is to expand the Finance team.

team. Establishing various Marketing/Relations functions, which is not seen in the other 2 companies — expect more marketing campaigns?

functions, which is not seen in the other 2 companies — expect more marketing campaigns? Engineering

Hiring Intern

Keywords in Job Descriptions

Other than high level insights like expansion focus, there are other interesting findings if we drill deeper into the job descriptions.

A job description usually consist of at least 2 parts — (i) the responsibilities of the role, and(ii) the requirements of the role. Responsibilities is more about the role (the tasks), while requirements is more about the person (the needed skills). I separated these 2 parts from each other and apply keyterms extraction (top 5 keywords) on each of them.

We use the SGRank algorithm provided by a package called textacy, which provides a lot of handy NLP toolkits on top of spacy. The top 5 keywords extracted by the SGRank algorithm is pretty good, even without any fine tuning.

For example, for the Executive Assistant role in WeLab, the responsibilities keywords are [“ground transportation”, “travel booking”, “business meetings”, “meeting schedules”, “level executives”], and the requirements keywords are [“communication skills”, “ms word”, “excellent interpersonal”, “high flexibility”, “good english”]. These make a pretty good summary of the role nature and the skills needed.

Clustering roles into groups with word embedding and t-SNE

spacy provides us with noun_chunks and word embeddings which are very useful when we are trying to cluster individual datapoints into groups. spacy built-in part-of-speech annotator does a pretty good job in extracting noun_chunks from a given text. These nouns are good representation of the role nature.

If you get the .vector property of a noun chunk, it will return the word embeddings (vector representation) of the noun chunk. Word embeddings allow us to quantify relationship between words (how similar 2 words/phrases are). It even make arithmetics on words possible!

In our case, I take an average of the noun_chunks word embeddings of the Requirements column for each role, and applied a method called t-SNE to reduce the 300-dimension vectors into (x, y) coordinates. The results are visualised in an interactive plot created by bokeh.

If we hover on the adjacent points, we can see some structure among these points. The lower part of the plots are mostly engineering roles, and fullstack developer is between frontend developer and backend developer. On the left, admin roles like Administrative Assistant, Executive Assistant, Receptionist etc are close to each other, and similar structure exists in other parts of the plot. This technique could be useful when HR managers/Recruiters are trying to analyse the job openings by competitors in the market.

Closing

There is a lot information we can tell from the job openings of a company, especially when the company is actively hiring. This may explain why “secretive” industries like hedge fund tend to hire via agents.

At the same time, the job openings could serve as a signal to the candidates/investors/general public about the “stage” or “taste” of your company — what kind of roles you are hiring the most may tell story about the “stage”; and the techstack/skills listed in the job description tells a lot about the “taste” of your company.

The virtual banking scene will only be going forward, given the advantages enjoyed by this sub-sector. In 2018, Standard Chartered spent 790M HKD[1] on rent/building related matters, which contributes 6.78% to the 11,647M total operating expenses. And the 7,074M staff cost could be utilised more efficiently when banks can go branchless. The retail banking industry could be very different in a few years from now.

[1] https://av.sc.com/hk/zh/content/docs/hk-c-ar2018-101.pdf p.256

Appendix: Data used in this analysis