Ocearch tracks whales, seals, sharks, and many other types of sea life as they make their way back and forth across the ocean. The tracking is available on their site and you can even sign up to follow certain sharks as they send in their telemetry data to the center.

Oh, does it bother you to be tagged?

All of this comes together as a ton of data including, location, speed, depth, heart rate and other metrics in the hope that we can better understand these animals in their own environment. By tracking and storing all of this data, environmentalists and biologists hope to analyze and improve the understanding of these magnificent creatures, without disturbing them.

The process of tagging an animal certainly has some momentary pain for the animal, and then they pretty much go about their lives and begin to transmit tons of data.

Fitness Trackers Are Telemetry Tags for Humans

So adorably simple.

In her book, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power, Shoshana Zuboff does an excellent write up on telemetry and its origins and similarities to human tracking. Telemetry in the wild requires us to capture and forcibly attach a device to the animal. In the human realm, this happens in retail stores and on Amazon when we buy our fitness trackers. Sure, it’s a bit painful to pay the $600 for a top-notch tracker, but heck, I want to improve my fitness, so let’s go for it.

About ten years ago, this was my Timex watch. It was before fitness tracking really took off. There were a few Garmin and Polar trackers back then, but they were like strapping a microwave to your wrist, so only the most die-hard triathletes used them. Most of us just used this type of stopwatch to keep track of how long we worked out. This Timex was a higher-end model because it actually stored something like the last 20 workouts, which amounted to exactly 40 data points total. Start. Stop. Start. Stop. Start. Stop.

Truly high-tech.

SWOLF you.

Today, I have this incredible Garmin Fenix watch. This watch tracks literally everything. Time, location, waypoints, direction, speed, cadence, pace, heart rate, elevation, VO2 Max (oxygen velocity), steps, weight, swim speed, and even your SWOLF. Never heard of SWOLF? It’s what you get if swimming and golf have a baby.

To think how far these devices have come in such a brief period is amazing. I imagine they learned many of their algorithmic tricks from the classic use of telemetry in other fields of biology.

Tracking all of this data is at first amazing to a data geek such as myself. However, after a few months of inspecting and analyzing the data, I came to understand two painful realizations.

First, I’m No Healthier

Gathering data is not the same as having an answer or an action plan. The reality is that data is helpful but it must be interpreted and turned into action by individuals. As it turns out, my findings personally are not that dissimilar to others, in that fitness tracking doesn’t have a drastic difference in the outcome.

The reams and reams of data available from Garmin are impressive but what I realized is that I would analyze that data for a pretty decent amount of time each week. At the end of each workout and at least a few times a week, I’d review the data for anywhere from 5 minutes to 10 minutes. Add that up, and I could have actually used that time to work out, resulting in roughly one additional 45-minute workout a week. Doesn’t sound like much, but to give credit to the Timex stopwatch, finding the most important data points and focusing on those is sometimes more important than tracking everything.

Second, I’m Producing a Ton of Personal Data

Being the geek that I am, I took the output from Garmin from one 8-mile run while visiting the Jersey Shore and began to analyze it. Garmin provides these beautiful dashboard views of the data it gathers workout by workout. You can view some combination of screens on your phone or desktop through their App.