What is the journey to the cloud?

The time is ripe, guys. What we have seen in the last years was upsetting. Cloud coming out as a concept and in a decade changes our lives. Just think about your photos that are stored nowhere in the cloud and accessible by all places. Nowadays everybody, from developers to CEOs, knows that there is an opportunity called the cloud. This article, after a brief introduction to the cloud advantages, show how to move your on-prem application.

What are the cloud advantages?

At the beginning of the cloud age, the keyword for convincing people to go cloud was “it’s cheap”. Well, after ten years of cloud we understood that is not a question of costs. In some cases, we experienced that the cloud cost more than an on-prem solution. The keywords for the cloud are flexibility, efficiency, and strategy.

Flexibility

The most common requirement in IT projects is time to marked. Nowadays everybody needs solutions soon and before the competitor. This continuous hurry conflict with usual timing to implement on-prem solutions. Moreover, you need to experiment with a lot of solutions to be competitive. This means that not all the projects you will finish will see the end or long and prolific life. But hardware cannot be simply resold at the end, and times of sysadmin never come back. In this scenario, the Cloud helps us. It is flexible, so you can scale and shrink based on your needs. Moreover, you are sure that, if you have enough money to buy it, there will be enough resources for you.

Efficiency

The on-prem solution is hard to maintain a need a lot of effort to keep it efficient. You need to monitor the physical data center, monitor the infrastructure, get the best contracts whit ISP and pay for unuseful resources like redundancy hardware. You also have to pay for security aspects like intrusion tests, insurance and so on. Basically, the cloud provider is more efficient than a single company, that because this is their job. They capitalize on costs and can afford better security checks. Moreover thinks to the most valuable services like AI API. How many companies can hire a machine learning engineer to ask him to solve an image classification problem? Maybe is quicker and cheaper at the end pay for an expensive ready to use service.