Image by Philadelphia 76ers on flickr

What Is Tanking?

Tanking is the art of creating a purposefully bad team with the intention of losing games to gain high draft picks. Ultimately, almost all people agree you need a truly great player on your team to win a championship in today’s NBA. Tanking aims to gain this player with top draft pick, and to ultimately win a championship with the core constructed while tanking.

The strategy has become increasingly common in recent years as winning an NBA championship has become increasingly difficult.

The Aim of This Analysis

Subsequently, this analysis aims to determine three different things:

What is a reasonable scenario that tanking might look like? What kind of draft picks would that team receive, and what are the odds that one of those draft picks might yield a truly great player? If that team does gain a superstar, how likely are they to win a Championship with that player?

For the purpose of this analysis, I will define a great player as a Hall of Fame caliber player.

Part I: The Tanking Scenario

Determining a reasonable tanking scenario is the most subjective part of this analysis. Tanking can take many different shapes. How poorly a team places depends on the tanking “competition”, how well they draft, and how committed to tanking they are. To get a start, I made a decision that a tanking team has made an obvious decision to rebuild and temporarily forgo competitiveness (i.e., they aren’t just bad). Since no one scenario could encompass everything, I instead decided to create three, modeled after three recent rebuilds the NBA has seen. Here they are:

Philadelphia 76ers: The Hard Rebuild Scenario

The 76ers rebuild began in the 2013–2014 NBA season, after trading away marquee player Jrue Holiday. The 76ers are noted for their extreme commitment to tanking, stripping away any and all assets that could possibly assist in winning. At their lowest point, they were the second worst team in NBA history, thus making this the Hard rebuild. Four seasons after it…