What I Learned from (Two-time) Kaggle Grandmaster Abhishek Thakur

Photo by Georgie Cobbs on Unsplash

Quick Bio

Before his many data scientist stints in companies scattered throughout Germany, Abhishek Thakur earned his bachelor’s in electrical engineering at NIT Surat and his master’s in computer science at the University of Bonn. Currently, he holds the title of Chief Data Scientist at Norway’s boost.ai, a “software company that specializes in conversational artificial intelligence (AI).” But I’m most impressed by Abhishek’s Kaggle clout.

You can visit his Kaggle profile here. Here’s a snapshot of his accolades:

Competitions Grandmaster (17 gold medals and an all-time high rank of #3 in the world)

Kernels Expert (he’s well within the top 1% of Kagglers)

Discussion Grandmaster (65 gold medals and an all-time high rank of #2 in the world)

I want to take a look at Abhishek’s tutorial, Approaching (Almost) Any NLP Problem on Kaggle. I’ve selected this kernel of Abhishek’s because I myself have been trying to learn more about natural language processing, and how could I resist learning with Kaggle’s Halloween-themed Spooky Authors dataset?

Abhishek’s Approach to NLP

I would highly encourage you to read this article alongside the kernel. And if you really want a firmer grasp of NLP or data science in general, be sure that you understand every line of Abhishek’s code by writing it yourself as you go through his kernel.

Just so we don’t forget — our task is to identify the author (EAP — Edgar Allen Poe; HPL — H.P. Lovecraft; MWS — Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley) of each sentence in the test set.

1. Exploring the Data and Understanding the Problem

After importing the necessary Python modules and the data, Abhishek calls the head() method on the data to see what the first five rows look like. Since Abhishek is a pro and this is an NLP problem, the exploratory data analysis (you’ll most often see this referred to as EDA) is shallow compared to problems involving numerical data. Data science newcomers might benefit from more thorough EDA. A…