Why is Python Programming a perfect fit for Big Data?

We’ll discuss in the blog the major benefits of using Python for big data. Scarlett Rose · Follow 5 min read · Dec 27, 2019 -- Listen Share

Python is everywhere!

With the widespread use of Python across major industry verticals, Python has become a hot topic of discussion in the town. Python has been acknowledged as the fastest-growing programming language, as per Stack Overflow Trends.

According to Stack Overflow Developers’ Survey 2019, Python is the second “most loved” language with 73% of the developers choosing it above other languages prevailing in the market.

Python is a general-purpose and open-source programming language used by big names such as Reddit, Instagram, and Venmo says a press release.

Why choose Python for Big Data?

Python and Big Data is the new combination invading the market space NOW. Python is in great demand among Big Data companies. In this blog, we will discuss the major benefits of using Python and why Python for big data has become a preferred choice among businesses these days.

Simple Coding

Python programming involves fewer lines of codes as compared to other languages available for programming. It is able to execute programs in the least lines of code. Moreover, Python automatically offers assistance to identify and associate data types.

“Python is a truly wonderful language. When somebody comes up with a good idea it takes about 1 minute and five lines to program something that almost does what you want.” — Jack Jansen

Python programming follows an indentation based nesting structure. The language can process lengthy tasks within a short span of time. As there is no limitation to data processing, you can compute data in commodity machines, laptop, cloud, and desktop.

Earlier, Python was considered to be a slower language in comparison to some of its counterparts like Java and Scala but the scenario has changed now.

The advent of the Anaconda platform has offered a great speed to the language. This is why Python for big data has become one of the most popular options in the industry. You can also hire Python Developer who can implement these Python benefits in your business.

Open-Source

Developed with the help of a community-based model, Python is an open-source programming language. Being an open-source language, Python supports multiple platforms. Also, it can be run in various environments such as Windows and Linux.

“My favorite language for maintainability is Python. It has simple, clean syntax, object encapsulation, good library support, and optional named parameters”, said Bram Cohen.

Source

Library Support

Python programming offers the use of multiple libraries. This makes it a famous programming language in fields like scientific computing. As Big Data involves a lot of data analysis and scientific computing, Python and Big Data serve as great companions.

Python offers a number of well-tested analytics libraries. These libraries consist of packages such as,

Numerical computing

Data analysis

Statistical analysis

Visualization

Machine learning

Source

Python’s Compatibility with Hadoop

Both Python and Hadoop are open-source big data platforms. This is the reason why Python is more compatible with Hadoop than other programming languages. You can incorporate these Python features in your business. To do this, you need to hire Python developers from a reputed Python development company.

What are the benefits of using the Pydoop Package?

1. Access to HDFS API

The Pydoop package( Python and Hadoop) provides you access to the HDFS API for Hadoop which allows you to write Hadoop MapReduce programs and applications.

How is the HDFS API beneficial for you? So, here you go. The HDFS API lets you read and write information easily on files, directories, and global file system properties without facing any hurdles.

2. Offers MapReduce API

Pydoop offers MapReduce API for solving complex problems with minimal programming efforts. This API can be used to implement advanced data science concepts like ‘Counters’ and ‘Record Readers’ which makes Python programming the best choice for Big Data.

Also, Read — “Is Python for Financial App Development the Right fit?”

Speed

Python is considered to be one of the most popular languages for software development because of its high speed and performance. As it accelerates the code well, Python is an apt choice for big data.

Python programming supports prototyping ideas which help in making the code run fast. Moreover, while doing so, Python also sustains the transparency between the code and the process.

Python programming contributes to making code readable and transparent thus rendering great assistance in the maintenance of the code.

Also, Read — “Using Python for Big Data and Analytics”

Scope

Python allows users in simplifying data operations. As Python is an object-oriented language, it supports advanced data structures. Some of the data structures that Python manages include lists, sets, tuples, dictionaries and many more.

Besides this, Python helps in supporting scientific computing operations such as matrix operations, data frames, etc. These incredible features of Python help to enhance the scope of the language thus enabling it to speed up data operations. This is what makes Python and Big Data a deadly combination.

Source

Data Processing Support

Python has an inbuilt feature of supporting data processing. You can use this feature to support data processing for unstructured and unconventional data. This is the reason why big data companies prefer to choose Python as it is considered to be one of the most important requirements in big data. So, hire offshore Python programmers and avail the advantages of using Python in your business.

Final words

These were some of the benefits of using Python. So by now, you would have got a clear idea of why Python for big data is considered the best fit. Python is a simple and open-source language possessing high speed and robust Library support.

“Big data is at the foundation of all the megatrends that are happening.” –Chris Lynch

With the use of big data technology spreading across the globe, meeting the requirements of this industry is surely a daunting task. But, with its incredible benefits, Python has become a suitable choice for Big Data. You can also leverage Python in your business for availing its advantages.