Deposit Photos

This post was developed in collaboration with Dr. George Tomko, Inventor, Biometric Encryption and Smart Data Agents.

We live in an age of increasing centralization that pervades all aspects of our culture. In today’s world, centralization equates to control; centralization equates to power. Centralization gave rise to bureaucratic institutions where decisions, borne by a few, ran through a hierarchical structure. This ensured a system where one authority determined how systems were run and how objectives were met. This is symbolic of how authoritarian governments operate. These governments have unlimited power but their effective size is much smaller, run by one or a few persons who impose order. If a constitution does exist within this type of system, it is essentially ignored if it promotes limiting powers of the state versus giving more voice to the people. Although leaders in many of these states are elected, this is wrapped in a shroud of whitewash where leaders do not govern based on the consent of the people.

Originally free societies evolved within a decentralized system, as exemplified by many of western economies. There were checks and balances based on a distributed system designed to serve the interests of the people and provide its citizens with the services they need. This kept society functioning. There are, however, aspects to western economies that have become increasingly centralized. Central banks have been given responsibility as lender to the government to ensure price stability through monetary policy, but in effect have achieved the opposite. One of their functions, for example, printing money, flows initially to the powerful, and by the time it reaches the pocketbooks of the people, it has inflated the cost of goods, thus widening the gap between the rich and poor. Banks, trusts and credit issuers function within a centralized financial system that controls the flow of money designed to mitigate fraud, so processes are implemented to censor transactions, and mandate their flow through centralized systems to maintain this control. A functioning society built on meeting the needs of its inhabitants has bequeathed these institutions with certain powers formed from a foundation of trust.