Manufacturing products can be very expensive and a complex process for those businesses that do not have the right tools and resources to develop quality products.

In the prevailing time, artificial intelligence and machine learning have become more prevalent in producing and assembling items, helping in reducing cost and time of production. In fact, 40% of all the potential value that can be created by analytics today all come from the AI and ML techniques. In totality, machine learning can account between $3.5 trillion to $5.8 trillion in the annual value — according to Mckinsey.

In the last 5 years, it has been recorded that exponential technologies can help build robust and rapid models that drive functional improvements.

The crux being, the leading growth hacking strategies involves integrating machine learning platforms that produce insights to improve product quality and production yield. Machine Learning helps to create smarter manufacturing where the robots can put their items together with detailed precision, the analytics can identify the forthcoming situations, and the automated processes can develop error-free outputs.

TrendForce has noted that smart manufacturing is directly proportional to growth at a rapid rate. The firm predicts that the smart manufacturing market will be worth over $200 billion in 2019 and grow to $320 billion by 2020, marking a projected compound annual growth rate of 12.5%. And many machine learning development companies are helping businesses with their manufacturing needs with a wide array of smart solutions.

The amount of data is growing day by day, therefore, the manufacturing businesses need to leverage smarter solutions to make their entire process efficient and scalable. The data helps a lot in terms of automating the process and even predicting and monitoring the performances.

Here are some of the ways how machine learning is impacting manufacturing -

Improving The Process

Manufacturers have been successful in including machine learning into the three aspects of the business — operations, production, and post-production. One of the organizations that have included the process is Fanuc, a Japanese manufacturer of industrial robotics and automation technology. Fanuc uses deep reinforcement learning, a type of machine learning solution developed by Preferred Networks that enables its robots to teach themselves new skills quickly and effectively, without the need for precise and complex programming.

Product Development

Data has brought big opportunities for manufacturing companies in terms of product development. The data helps businesses to better understand their customers, meet their demands, and satisfy their needs. This way, it will help develop new or better products for your customer base.

With valuable data, the manufacturers can develop a product with increased customer value and minimize the risks connected to the introduction of a new product to the market. Actionable insights are taken into account while planning, strategizing, and modeling the product, helping in strengthening the decision-making process. CRM application implementation is greatly taken into account to optimize the operational process.

2. Robot

Robots can change a lot in manufacturing. They can help perform the routine tasks that are complex or too dangerous for humans. The manufacturers tend to put more money in robotization to meet the demand and reduce human-errors. These industrial machines end to contribute a lot to quality product manufacturing. Every financial year, the product comes to the baseline to enhance its product lines.

3. Security

Machine Learning has developed platforms that have made mobility secured in an organization. ML algorithms make your processes secure and empower business innovation while ensuring the development of mobile apps, devices, and data is being protected across the enterprise. It lets on-device security and remediates device and network threats on any Android or iOS device.

Additionally, if an organization requires a fast, reliable, and secure VPN for streaming, torrenting, and protecting the data of the enterprise then Surfshark VPN has been reviewed as an excellent option.

4. Quality Control

Machine Learning plays an important role in enhancing the quality of the manufacturing process. Deep-learning neural networks can help in the availability, performance, quality of assembly equipment, and weaknesses of the machine.

Siemens has been using a neural network to monitor its steel manufacturing and improve the overall efficiency. They have been investing more than $10 Billion in acquiring ML-based companies to enhance the quality level of its operations.

5. Supply Chain Management

Machine learning helps in maximizing the company’s value by improving its logistics process, inventory management, asset management, and supply chain management. The integration of Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence, and IoT devices helps in ensuring high-level quality.

Today’s manufacturers are looking for ways to combine emerging technologies with asset tracking, accuracy, supply chain visibility, and inventory optimization. Machine learning development companies have developed a supply chain management suite that monitors every step of the manufacturing, packaging, and delivering.

PwC predicts — More manufacturers will adopt ML and analytics to improve predictive maintenance, which is slated to grow by 38% over the next five years. While Process visualization and automation are projected to grow by 34% over that span, while the integration of analytics, APIs and big data will contribute to a growth of 31% for connected factories

McKinsey later added — Machine Learning will reduce supply chain forecasting errors by 50%, while also reducing lost sales by 65%.

To summarize the current scenario

The core algorithm developed through machine learning and AI-enabled products will be a big digital transformation phase for the manufacturing players. In general, the industry will be willing to develop complex design processes with more sophisticated prototypes. While the data captured from the products and processes will be fed to the ML model to further improve the manufacturing process through a continuous feedback loop. As a range of robots and machine learning will transform the industrial operations, the manufacturing workforce will need to be reskilled to work alongside the newly developed equipment, while traditional machines will require a makeover to give be a fit in the industry.

The present preventive maintenance is taking machines off work on a regular basis which is increasing the downtime and is not cost-efficient. The approach also does not necessarily address the actual problems that are leading to system failure.

Getting actionable insights that are accurate requires a significant amount of data in real-time to understand the anomalies before system failure.

Machine Learning is a key enabler of advanced Predictive Maintenance by identifying, monitoring, and analyzing the critical system variables during the manufacturing process. Through ML, operators can be alerted before system failure, and in some cases without operator interaction addressed, and avoid costly unplanned downtime.