Why Strategy and Analytics (Together) are the Future of AI

In my last company, I led the development of a major data visualization addition to our core product. It allowed our product to be used for the first time by the C-Suite of our client base and that alone raised our price point considerably. But one problem kept recurring: smart people didn’t have the time or wherewithal to figure out what to do with the reports. They wanted guidance from a system that had seen more than they had which could automatically bring the next steps to them. They wanted AI, not charts.

So when my colleagues and I started our newest company 18 months ago, we said “no charts, no reports” would be our mantra. We invested our time deeply in strategic understanding of our buyers’ needs and built AI engines to support day-to-day nudges. The convergence of strategy and analytics was a journey that we’re still on, but the road we’ve traveled so far has made it clear to me that strategy is an equal partner with analytics in the pursuit of AI.

Strategy and analytics should already be inseparable even without considering AI

I believe the most valuable and innovative companies of the next twenty-five years will be those that build their strategies and product around unique data or analytics/algorithms.

Corporate strategy today needs to be heavily-anchored in data: data should guide strategic decisions and investments. I also believe building an analytics flywheel to create new innovation and customer value over time needs to be a major consideration of most strategies.

So why shouldn’t the corporate leadership in strategy and analytics be the same role? It’s a joint role I’ve played many times now and one I’m seeing it gaining in popularity.

In short, analytics is the new strategy.

Strategy

In a prior article I wrote that strategy “identifies a buyer, their need/value pool, our chosen mechanism for addressing that need and why it will be effective, the unique skills/assets/capabilities we have, and how all those things will come together to uniquely serve the buyers’…