Photo by Arman from his office rooftop at Google, NYC — on the last day of my trip.

I left my blue seat across from JFK C66 gate to head back to San Fransisco, a place I have called home for the past fifteen months. It’s still so hard to leave the City every time I come visit, but this time I made a conscious decision to let go of the past. I am moving on — or at least that’s what I keep trying to convince myself.

That weekend feels less like a vacation trip and more of a proper closure for my life chapter in New York City, at least for now. I was surrounded by closest friends whom I consider like a family of my own. I caught up and listened to their new phases of life — someone new, some place new, some new job, but some are still problems I am familiar of. I knew moving to the Bay Area was the right decision, but I didn’t realize how much it could make me homesick.

New York City — with all its histories in Upper West Side where I lived for nearly two years — was a place that brought many of my dreams come true. This city witnessed the happiest I’d ever been and heard the loudest I’ve cried. It’s the city that mirrors my soul in every wild angle. The city that holds my biggest dreams in its tiniest spaces. The city that no matter how far I leave, would still make me feel most at home.

There is no word to describe how much I wanted and loved New York, but I have to move on.

After all, there are things I admire about living in San Francisco. It’s the one place I had been curious to reside in as it is the Mecca of my field. It’s the home of hills and hikes that changed my environmental attitudes and lifestyle for good. It’s a place of freedom where I shattered my own glass ceiling, broke stereotypes of women as a minority, and often as the youngest and least experienced in the room. Because of the above and more reasons that follow, life in Silicon Valley is a humbling victory I probably shouldn’t take for granted.

Disclaimer: the following points represent views and data-based opinions of the…