Main

First, let’s import the tkinter and pandas packages and set up the main function. In the main function, other functions will be called based on user selection from the Menu.

main function

The Menu

The next step is using tkinter to set up the Menu in the menu function. A for loop is used to provide text parameters from a menu option list. I chose Radiobutton instead of the regular Button because Radiobutton only allows users to select one Radiobutton at a time. The indicatoron (stands for “indicator on”) option is set to 0 (The default is 1), which means that there will be no separate radio button indicator. Therefore, instead of having Radiobutton with circular holes containing white space, we can have Radiobutton with the complete text in a box that look like a regular buttons.

menu function

Radiobutton with indicatoron set to 0

For color schemes in tkinter , this chart is a good reference.

tkinter color chart

Import Data

Since our user already has a good collection of data, let’s let the user import his original dataset. In the import_cigar function, user can select a file from the computer and finish the import. If cigar_file.xlsx already exists, this new file will be concatenated with it; if cigar_file.xlsx does not exist, it will be created and data from the user selected file will be added to it.

import_cigar function

Select a file

cigar folder

Insert Data

User can also insert a new record of cigar by select “1. Insert” from the Menu. The function is achieved with the Label and Entry modules in tkinter . Once the user fills out this form and hits the “OK” button, the record will automatically be saved to cigar_file.xlsx as a new row.

insert_cigar function

View Data

If users would like to view the full data, they can select “2. View” option from the menu and have a quick look at the data.

view_cigar function

Simple Charts

charts_cigar function

I only created two simple charts here but the point is we have the power of plt or other packages in our hands to create visualizations and display them with tkinter .

Simple Cigar Charts

Ready to Smoke

Finally, let’s find the cigars that are ready to smoke! The real rules are more complicated than this, but for now, let’s just say if the cigar has been in the humidor for more than 3 years, it’s ready to smoke.