Member-only story You must know least squares

Let’s get away from the neural network hype and go back to the basics a bit, to the times when things actually made sense why they work. Marin Vlastelica · Follow Published in Towards Data Science · 6 min read · Aug 8, 2019 -- 1 Share

Machine learning is a really hot topic, everybody wants to do it or use it somehow in a product, or to reduce business operating costs. Machine learning seems to be the answer to the prayers of the business world. Yet, it can be pretty astonishing how people jump into machine learning. Yes, I know, neural networks are the “thing”, but jumping into neural networks is misguided in my opinion.

All of machine learning does not revolve about neural networks

Yes, they can do cool stuff, with a lot, really a lot of compute. But there was a time when machine learning solutions were elegant, efficient and quick. In this article, we’ll get down to the basics, and talk about least squares regression. Why should we talk about that? Because, believe it or not, this simple method is still used in statistical analysis, where there is a lot of data to analyze. In Kaggle competitions it is constantly used to observe trends in data, or variance and so on. Least squares is a thing, and not enough people know the math behind it although it is dead easy. So, let’s get cracking.

If you have ever taken a simple class in linear algebra, you know what is a matrix and you have most probably seen this kind of equation:

If we want to get the solution to this equation, we need the inverse of matrix A (we are just going to consider the case where A is invertible, and the equation is not overdetermined). So the solution looks as simple as this:

So now, we know how we get a solution to this simple equation, or better to say set of equations, since we can look at each row of matrix A as a linear equation by itself. The matrix formulation is a simple compact form to describe a set of linear equations.

But this is not what we actually want to do in the end. We want to learn something, we want to do machine learning! So where is…