“Not all data is equal”

I’m sharing the first expert anecdote from my book, Human-in-the-Loop Machine Learning. I have been fortunate to chat with many leaders in the machine learning community about their experience. Many shared personal anecdotes with me that deserve a bigger audience.

For each leader that is featured in the book there were two selection criteria:

Their early career was as an engineer or scientist. All the experts in the book were software engineers, physicists, linguists, or similar, at some point early in their career. So, they know what it is like to annotate data and/or build machine learning models. They have founded a company that uses machine learning. So, the experts also know what it means to think about shipping machine learning products that can impact the real world.

All the leaders are great role models for people who want to build a career in data science.

The first anecdote accompanies chapters on Active Learning: the process of selecting the right data for human review. Most deployed machine learning models used supervised learning, with thousands and sometimes millions of human-labeled data items. Active Learning determines which raw data items are the best for human review and annotation.

The first expert is Jennifer Prendki, the founder and CEO of Alectio. She previously led data science teams at Atlassian, Figure Eight, and Walmart, and has a PhD in particle physics. Jennifer’s company, Alectio, specializes in data-efficiency to help machine learning teams build their models with less data.

“Not all data is equal”

If you care about your nutrition, you don’t go to the supermarket and randomly select items from the shelves. You might eventually get the nutrients you need by eating random items from the supermarket shelves, however, you will eat a lot of junk food in the process. I think it is weird that in Machine Learning, people still think it’s better to “sample the supermarket randomly” than figuring out what they need and focusing their efforts there. The first Active Learning system I built was by necessity. I was building Machine Learning systems to help a large retail store make sure that when someone searched on the website, the right combination of products came up. Almost overnight, a company re-org meant that my human labeling budget was cut in half and we had a 10x increase in inventory that we had to label. So, my labeling team had only 5% the budget per item that we previously did. I created my first Active Learning framework to discover which was the most important 5%. The results were better than random sampling with a bigger budget. I have used Active Learning in most of my projects since, because not all data is equal! Jennifer Prendki, in Human-in-the-Loop Machine Learning, Robert Munro, Manning Publications

You don’t go shopping by randomly sampling from every shelf, so why are you doing this with your data?

I am very grateful to Jennifer for sharing her expertise with me and with the readers of my book and this article!

For more on Active Learning, see the cheatsheets that I shared recently for Diversity Sampling and Uncertainty Sampling:

Your data is already biased

Many data scientists insist that random sampling is still their preference because they might bias their data through Active Learning. I think this is the wrong way to look at the data that you already have.

To continue the analogy, a supermarket is not an unbiased sample of food. There are all sorts of factors that go into deciding what ends up on a shelf in the first place, including the store location, time-of-year, specific supplier partnerships, promotions, and expected profit.

The same is probably true of your raw data: there are many factors that led to the creation and storage of the raw data that you have available to you, and chances are that your raw data over-samples and under-samples in many different ways. Like I point out in my book, biases in data often correlate with real-world bias, and so you risk echoing or amplifying real-world biases if you aren’t mindful about how you approach your data annotation strategy.

I recommend that you assume that your raw data is already biased due to the filtering and sampling techniques that generated the data in the first place. Active Learning is then one way to help make your data fairer, while at the same time making your models more accurate.

Robert Munro

November 2019